# Fuente: ONU-145305.pdf
# Total páginas: 106

=== Página 1 ===

=== Página 2 ===
CREDITS
© 2020 International Bank for Reconstruction and 
Development / The World Bank 1818 H Street NW
Washington DC 20433
Telephone: 202-473-1000
Internet: www.worldbank.org
This work is a product of the staff of The World Bank with 
external contributions. The findings, interpretations, and 
conclusions expressed in this work do not necessarily 
reflect the views of The World Bank, its Board of Executive 
Directors, or the governments they represent.
The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of 
the data included in this work. The boundaries, colors, 
denominations, and other information shown on any map 
in this work do not imply any judgment on the part of The 
World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or 
the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.
Rights and Permissions
The material in this work is subject to copyright. Because 
The World Bank encourages dissemination of its 
knowledge, this work may be reproduced, in whole or in 
part, for noncommercial purposes as long as full attribution 
to this work is given.
Any queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary 
rights, should be addressed to World Bank Publications, 
The World Bank Group, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, 
DC 20433, USA; fax: 202-522- 2625; e-mail: pubrights@
worldbank.org.

=== Página 3 ===
CREDITS
CONTENT
Letter from World Bank
Executive Summary
Chapter 1
Chapter 2
Chapter 3
Chapter 4
Chapter 5
Chapter 6
INTRODUCTION
1.1 Objectives of this Handbook
1.2 Important Definitions
1.3 How to use this Hanbook
13
14
16
21
59
61
62
90
95
129
167
168
195
196
198
199
208
25
26
29
30
47
48
51
52
55
WHY GENDER-INCLUSIVE PLANNING AND DESIGN?
2.1 History of Gender in Modern Urban Planning and Design
2.2 Gender in Urban Planning and Design Today
2.3 Gendered Challenges in the Urban Environment
2.4 The Bottom Line: Why Should We Care About Gender in 
Planning and Design?
2.5 The Opportunity: What Could a Gender-Inclusive City Look Like?
FOUNDATIONS OF GENDER-INCLUSIVE PLANNING  
AND DESIGN
3.1 Goals of Gender-Inclusive Planning and Design
3.2 Key Commitments for Gender-Inclusive Planning and Design
PROCESS, PLAN AND PROJECT GUIDELINES
4.0 Introduction to the Guidelines
4.1 Process Guidelines and Activities
4.2 Planning and Project Guidelines
4.2.1 Planning Guidelines
4.2.2 Project Guidelines
CASE STUDIES
5.0 Case Studies
CONCLUSION AND FURTHER RESOURCES
6.1 Conclusion: Looking Forward
6.2 Further Resources
6.3 Reference List
6.4 Image Credits
7
8
World Bank Group
Horacio Terraza — Lead Urban Specialist
Maria Beatriz Orlando — Lead Social Development 
Specialist
Carina Lakovits — Urban Development Consultant
Vanessa Lopes Janik — Social Development Consultant
Anna Kalashyan — Young Professional
External Consultant
Eva Kail — External Peer Reviewer and Consultant, City 
of Vienna Strategic Planning Unit
Kounkuey Design Initiative
Chelina Odbert — Author
Joe Mulligan — Author
Rosie Jewell — Author 
Sabrina Ohler — Author
Lauren Elachi — Author
Naria Kiani — Author
Shirley Rempe — Author
Paola Méndez  — Research
Keana Flores — Research
Eric Riley — Research
Adriana Carías — Graphic Design
Nina Raj — Graphic Design
Scott Shinton — Graphic Design

=== Página 4 ===
7
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
6
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
Closing gaps between men and women, boys and girls is central to the 
sustainable development goals, and achieving gender equality is a core 
tenet within the World Bank Group’s mission of achieving prosperity 
for all. However, across development sectors, progress in closing gaps 
has been uneven and in some sectors, such as financial inclusion, even 
stagnant.  Grasping and grappling with the complexities of gender norms, 
outdated institutional policies, and discriminatory laws and regulations — as 
documented, for instance, in Women, Business, and the Law — can be a 
daunting challenge. Urban planning and design practitioners are not immune 
to these issues — in fact, their disciplines have historically helped reinforce 
unequal gender roles and responsibilities, with adverse consequences on 
mobility, access to key assets and public spaces, and safety for women, girls, 
and sexual and gender minorities in cities around the world. Nonetheless, 
the role that today’s urban planners and designers, alongside cities and 
community members, can play in promoting gender equality is significant. 
After all, urban planning and design decisions shape the very environment 
we live in.
This handbook aims to illuminate the relationships between gender 
inequality, the built environment, and urban planning and design; and to lay 
out a menu of simple, practicable processes and best practices for urban 
planning and design projects that build more inclusive cities – for men and 
women, for those with disabilities, and for those who are marginalized and 
excluded. The work is the result of a collaborative process between experts 
from the Urban, Infrastructure, Social Development, and Gender units within 
the World Bank Group, and external experts with extensive experience in 
participatory urban planning and design. Covering a comprehensive array of 
plan and project typologies and providing case studies from diverse contexts 
around the world, we hope this handbook will be an invaluable source of 
practical guidance and inspiration for World Bank Task Team Leaders as 
well as consultants and clients across all World Bank regions.
Caren Grown, Senior Director of Gender
Sameh Wahba, Global Director for the World Bank's Urban, Disaster Risk 
Management, Resilience and Land Global Practice
LETTER FROM 
WORLD BANK
“He’s just a baby… sometimes it takes a while before somebody offers 
me a seat. The bus takes too long and I have him in my arms, together 
with my purse, shopping bags… It’s all very complicated.”
Woman from Recife, Brazil (ITDP, 2018)
“It was about 7pm when I had gotten to the latrine only to encounter a 
group of four young men. I shouted, asking them to leave me, and I could 
feel them undress me and one of them say that they would teach me a 
lesson on why I should not be out at that time...”
Woman from Nairobi, Kenya (Amnesty International, 2010)
“I’ll go out to a park and I’m not trying to be the center of attraction, like 
they’re straight and they’re not really looking at you… so I feel really 
uncomfortable just trying to strike a conversation with a straight person 
because they don’t know where I’m coming from or they might take me 
offensive.”
Transgender woman of color from Los Angeles, USA (Wendel, 2017)
“In public spaces and in the street, the city is very dangerous. There are 
gangs, robberies, assaults; you can be kidnapped, followed, sexually 
harassed, [and] raped. Walking in the streets is dangerous, especially in 
desolate areas; it is more dangerous at night when there is low light.” 
Young girl from Lima, Peru (UN-HABITAT, 2013) 
“I have no house now. Everything was lost to river erosion… I could not 
afford to buy food. He [my husband] left us, telling us that he was going 
abroad… he never returned. This kid was in my womb back then while he 
left us.”
Woman from Dhaka, Bangladesh (Joungn, 2019)
“There are pay-and-use toilets built outside the Chawl which charge two 
rupees for each use. Sometimes, when we are sick, it becomes really 
difficult for us to pay every time. The open drainage flows right outside 
each hut, so small children use the drainage, but for me as a woman, it 
is very difficult at night, so we have to hold everything ‘till the morning 
arrives.” 
Woman from Jai Bhawani Chawl, Mumbai, India (COHRE, 2008)

=== Página 5 ===
8
9
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
Executive Summary
Executive Summary
Urban planning and design quite literally shape the environment around us — and 
that environment, in turn, shapes how we live, work, play, move, and rest. As such, 
the processes of planning and design have a direct relationship with the structures and 
behaviors that define our societies, often both reflecting and reinforcing the inequities within 
them. While it is almost universally understood that women, girls, people with disabilities, 
and sexual and gender minorities face significant social and economic disadvantages when 
compared with able-bodied, cisgender, heterosexual men, what is still not fully understood 
and accepted among many planning and design practitioners is exactly how conditions in 
the built environment — and the lack of diversity in the voices shaping it — feed into and 
perpetuate gender inequity.
In general, cities work better for heterosexual, able-bodied, cisgender men than they 
do for women, girls, sexual and gender minorities, and people with disabilities. Key 
aspects of the built urban environment – related to access, mobility, safety and freedom 
from violence, health and hygiene, climate resilience, and security of tenure – create 
disproportionate burdens for women, girls, and sexual and gender minorities of all ages and 
abilities, thus exacerbating and reinforcing existing gender inequities. Faced with challenges 
ranging from transportation services that prioritize commuting over caregiving, to the lack 
of lighting and toilets in public spaces, many feel inconvenienced, ill-at-ease, and unsafe in 
the urban environment. These issues stem largely from the absence of women, girls, and 
sexual and gender minorities in planning and design decisions, leading to assumptions 
around their needs and the encoding of traditional gender roles within the built environment.
Over the past few decades, theorists and practitioners have begun to ask: how might 
we design and plan cities that work well for everyone? What would such a city look 
like, and how would we go about creating it? However, with women and sexual and gender 
minorities still largely excluded from both the professional fields of planning and design, 
and from public decision-making processes around urban development, answering these 
questions in practical terms continues to pose a significant challenge.
The Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design aims to fill the gap 
between gender-inclusive policy and practice, and respond to the historic exclusion 
of women, girls, and sexual and gender minorities from the processes of urban 
planning and design. It clearly presents the economic and social case for gender inclusion 
in urban planning and design and provides practical guidelines on how to implement gender-
inclusive planning and design projects. In particular it seeks to fulfill the following objectives:
Why Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design Matter
•	
Demonstrate the ways in which gender inequities intersect with urban planning and 
design, with clear, digestible summaries of the negative impacts for women, girls, and 
sexual and gender minorities of all ages and abilities
•	
Make the clear economic case for addressing inequity and incorporating gender 
inclusion into urban planning and design
•	
Highlight the need to consider gender inclusion in an intersectional way, especially 
taking into account sexual orientation and gender identity, ability, and age
How Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design are Done
•	
Set out overarching commitments to guide gender-inclusive planning and design 
processes toward meaningful, effective outcomes and long-term improvements in the 
status of women, girls, and sexual and gender minorities
•	
Provide practicable methodologies, activities, and good practices for incorporating and 
elevating the voices of women, girls, and sexual and gender minorities in participatory 
planning and design processes
•	
Give clear, specific design guidelines, appropriate for and adaptable to all regions, for a 
range of planning and project typologies carried out by the World Bank
The handbook has been written to support World Bank staff, clients, contractors, and 
consultants involved in implementing projects within the Bank’s urban development 
portfolio. It may also be a valuable resource for external practitioners seeking to take 
concrete steps toward a more gender-inclusive approach.
Gender biases in the built environment contribute directly to gendered social and 
economic inequities, feeding into the systemic oppression of women, girls, sexual and 
gender minorities, and those with disabilities. Faced with such a built environment, women, 
girls, and sexual and gender minorities of all ages and abilities often:
•	
Struggle to access gainful employment, education and other basic human endowments
•	
Struggle to accumulate wealth and achieve economic independence
•	
Spend more on basic services
•	
Have fewer social freedoms — hindering them from building social networks to cope 
with risk, stress, and shock
•	
Struggle to exercise agency in public decision-making, including decisions that shape 
the built environment

=== Página 6 ===
10
11
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
Executive Summary
Executive Summary
However, the social and economic costs of gender inequity in the built environment 
also point to a critical opportunity. If planning and design processes become more 
gender-inclusive, and the built environment more accessible, connected, safe, healthy, 
climate resilient, and secure, then women, girls, and sexual and gender minorities of all 
ages and abilities will make significant economic and social gains — and contributions to 
sustainable development — around the world.
The ultimate goal of gender-inclusive urban planning and design is to advance 
gender equity and unlock more inclusive economic and social development. To 
achieve this goal, urban planners and designers must include women, girls, and sexual 
and gender minorities of all ages and abilities in planning and design decision-making 
processes, and work to combat the gendered imbalances in the built environment that 
prevent their full social and economic inclusion. Meeting these goals requires a fundamental 
shift in thinking and approach, and in particular a commitment to participatory processes, 
integrated approaches, Universal Design, building knowledge and power among under-
represented groups; and financial investment. These commitments, summarized below, are 
a direct answer to the historic exclusion of women, girls, and sexual and gender minorities 
from planning and design, and form the starting point for the practical planning and design 
guidelines in this handbook.
•	
Participatory: actively including the voices of women, girls, and sexual 
and gender minorities 
 
•	
Integrated: adopting a holistic, cross-cutting approach that centers 
gender throughout and promotes citizen-city relationship building
 
•	
Universal: meeting the needs of women, girls, and sexual and gender 
minorities of all ages and abilities
 
•	
Knowledge-building: seeking out and sharing robust, meaningful new 
data on gender equity
 
•	
Power-building: growing the capacity and influence of under-
represented groups in key decisions
 
•	
Invested-in: committing the necessary finances and expertise to 
follow through on intentional gender equity goals
GENDER-INCLUSIVE PLANNING AND DESIGN ARE...
GENDER-INCLUSIVE PLANNING AND DESIGN ARE NOT...
•	
Prescriptive: designing and planning for women, girls, and sexual and 
gender minorities instead of with them
 
•	
An add-on: considering women separately from other beneficiaries 
and project goals; failing to connect the dots or the actors involved
 
•	
Exclusive: being concerned with the needs of able-bodied women or 
female persons alone
 
•	
Uninformative: operating in a vacuum without engaging with and 
contributing to broader knowledge on gender
 
•	
Disempowering: repeating or reinforcing historical imbalances in 
representation and agency
 
•	
Uninvested-in: assuming gender goals are achieved if women are 
among beneficiaries without investing the required time and resources 
to follow through
•	
follow through
The Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design presents clear and 
practical guidelines for both (i) implementing gender-inclusive planning and design 
processes; and (ii) creating gender-inclusive plans and projects. The aim of this 
breakdown is to provide guidance on both “process” and “product”. The Process Guidelines 
give guidance on flexible, adaptable actions and activities that can be applied throughout the 
course of a plan or project development in any context, with a focus: on establishing gender 
principles; monitoring, evaluation, accountability, and learning; community participation; 
and considerations for project implementation. Included is a menu of seven gender-
inclusive engagement activities that will enable project teams to garner community buy-in, 
gather qualitative and quantitative data, and co-design solutions with project beneficiaries. 
The “Planning and Project Guidelines” provide guidance — including good practices and, 
where possible and applicable, minimum design standards — for the implementation of the 
following types of plan or project:
•	
Urban Land Management Plans
•	
Metropolitan Development Plans
•	
Master Plans and Integrated Urban 
Development Plans
•	
City Mobility and Transportation Plans
•	
Neighborhood Development Plans
•	
Informal Neighborhood Upgrading Plans
•	
City Climate Action Plans
•	
Disaster Risk Management Plans
•	
Housing 

=== Página 7 ===
12
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
13
•	
Public Transport, Mobility Infrastructure, 
and Road Safety Interventions
•	
Streetscapes
•	
Public Spaces
•	
Basic Urban Services
•	 Energy
•	
Water, Sanitation, and Hygiene
•	 Solid Waste Management
•	 Communications and ICT
Several cities around the world are making strides in gender-inclusive planning 
and design, providing valuable learning opportunities and sources of inspiration. 
Case studies of gender-inclusive projects from these cities show how simple measures to 
improve access to land can dramatically increase agency and wellbeing; how increasing 
visibility and participation for disadvantaged groups can promote safety and access to 
the public realm; how proper planning with a gender lens can ensure the full participation 
of underrepresented voices; how better representation can yield innovative designs that 
serve everyone — not just women — better; and how short-term, “stop-gap” measures can 
complement and even enable long-term strategic efforts to improve gender equity. At the 
same time, the case studies reveal areas in which gender-inclusive strategies can come up 
short — from poor monitoring and evaluation to financial under-commitment and a failure 
to marry simple measures that improve convenience and safety with strategic efforts to 
challenge gender inequity. Lessons such as these point the way to how project processes 
and outputs can be improved in the future.
Women, girls, and sexual and gender minorities make up more than half of the 
world’s population. This handbook, a valuable and much-needed addition to the existing 
literature and resources on gender inclusion, seeks to bring their knowledge and skills, and 
their needs and desires, to the forefront of urban planning and design. By reimagining and 
reshaping cities in a more gender-inclusive way, community members, practitioners, and 
governments can unlock new economic and social opportunities to promote prosperity for 
all.
Executive Summary

=== Página 8 ===
14
15
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
Urban planning and design quite literally shape the environment around us — and that 
environment, in turn, shapes how we live, work, play, move, and rest. As such, the processes 
of planning and design have a direct relationship with the structures and behaviors that define 
our societies often both reflecting and reinforcing the inequities within. In general, cities 
work better for heterosexual, able-bodied, cisgender men than they do for women, girls, 
sexual and gender minorities, and people with disabilities. Faced with challenges ranging 
from transportation services that prioritize commuting over caregiving, to the lack of lighting 
and toilets in public spaces, many women, girls, and sexual and gender minorities around 
the world feel inconvenienced, ill-at-ease, and unsafe in the urban environment. Although 
not discussed within the scope of this document, boys and men at risk of homelessness 
or urban gang violence also have particular vulnerabilities that are often overlooked in the 
process of urban planning and design. Over the past few decades, theorists and practitioners 
have begun to ask: how might we design and plan cities that work well for everyone? 
What would such a city look like, and how would we go about creating it?
The World Bank, United Nations, and other key development agencies have long been firmly 
committed to advancing gender equality. However, key challenges in addressing gender-
related inequities in the urban built environment remain unsolved, with a clear gap between 
policy and practice. Many project managers, clients, and practitioners lack awareness of 
the importance of prioritizing gender in development, and do not have the specific, on-
the-ground knowledge or tools to effectively implement gender-inclusive strategies. This is 
compounded by significant gaps in gender- and sex-disaggregated data to inform project 
design, implementation, and evaluation; and a tendency to assume, rather than ask, what 
women, girls, and sexual and gender minorities want. Even the most well-intentioned 
projects can, as a result of these challenges, end up treating the symptom rather than 
the cause — accommodating or even reinforcing existing gender inequities rather than 
challenging them (Moser, 1993; Larsson and Friberg,  1999). 
This handbook is intended to help fill the clear gap between policy and practice, intention 
and action, by showing why and how to incorporate gender inclusion into urban planning 
and design. In particular, it aims to fulfill the following objectives:
Why Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design Matter
•	
Demonstrate the ways in which gender inequities intersect with urban planning and design, 
with clear, digestible summaries of the negative impacts for women, girls, and sexual and 
gender minorities of all ages and abilities
•	
Make the clear economic case for addressing inequity and incorporating gender inclusion 
into urban planning and design
•	
Highlight the need to consider gender inclusion in an intersectional way, especially taking into 
account sexual orientation and gender identity, ability, and age
Objectives of this 
Handbook
1.1  Objectives of this Handbook
How Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design are Done
•	
Set out overarching commitments to guide gender-inclusive planning and design processes 
toward meaningful, effective outcomes and long-term improvements in the status of women, 
girls, and sexual and gender minorities
•	
Provide practicable methodologies, activities, and good practices for incorporating and 
elevating the voices of women, girls, and sexual and gender minorities in participatory 
planning and design processes
•	
Give clear, specific design guidelines, appropriate for and adaptable to all regions, for a range 
of planning and project typologies carried out by the World Bank
Given the persisting critical gaps in gender equality around the world (World Bank, 2015) and the 
profound impacts of the built environment on everyday life and social relations, there is an urgent 
need — and opportunity — for urban planning and design to advance better, more equitable 
outcomes for people of all genders. This handbook is intended as a “go-to” guide that inspires 
and equips readers to not only commit to gender-inclusive urban planning and design, but also 
effectively incorporate it into the development, delivery, and evaluation of all World Bank urban 
planning and design projects. 
This handbook has been developed through a series of consultations, focus group discussion, 
and desk-level literature and portfolio reviews. It is the product of a collaborative process between 
experts from the Urban, Infrastructure, Social Development, and Gender units within the World 
Bank Group, and external experts who have extensive experience in participatory urban planning 
and design. 
WHO IS THS HANDBOOK FOR?
This handbook has been written primarily for three audiences with the aim 
of making a clear case for gender-inclusive design and urban planning and 
providing actionable guidelines for implementation:
•	
World Bank staff involved in designing, managing, delivering, and evaluating 
urban planning and design projects, particularly Task Team Leaders (TTLs)
•	
Government clients (municipal, regional, state, national) seeking to implement 
urban planning and design projects in their countries
•	
Contractors from all regions and at all stages of the project process, from 
concept note through to final evaluation
Additionally, external design and urban planning practitioners and project co-
funders may find this handbook a useful resource.

=== Página 9 ===
16
17
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
KEY SOCIAL CONCEPTS 
Sex
The biological categories of male, female, 
and intersex to which humans belong, based 
on sex characteristics and chromosomes.
Intersex
An umbrella term that refers to people who 
have one or more of a range of variations in 
physical sex characteristics that fall outside 
of traditional conceptions of male or female 
bodies. Some intersex characteristics are 
identified at birth, while other people may 
not discover they have intersex traits until 
puberty or later in life. Note that intersex is 
not synonymous with transgender.
Gender
Gender refers to social, behavioral, and 
cultural attributes, expectations, and norms 
associated with being male or female.
Gender Identity
Each person’s deeply-felt internal and 
individual experience of gender (e.g. of 
being a man, a woman, in-between, neither, 
or something else), which may or may not 
correspond with the sex they were assigned 
at birth or the gender attributed to them by 
other people. Note that this sense of self is 
not related to sexual orientation. Gender 
identity is internal; it is not necessarily 
visible to others.
Gender Expression
The way we show our gender to the world 
around us, through things such as clothing, 
hairstyles, and mannerisms, to name a few.
Transgender
Transgender refers to a person whose sex 
assigned at birth does not match their gender 
identity. The term “trans” is often used as 
shorthand.
Cisgender
Cisgender or cis (meaning “in alignment 
with” or “on the same side”) people are those 
whose gender identity is in alignment with 
the sex assigned to them at birth. 
Sexual Orientation
Each person’s enduring capacity for profound 
romantic, emotional, and/or physical feelings 
for, or attraction to, person(s) of a particular 
sex or gender. It encompasses hetero-, 
homo- and bi-sexuality and a wide range of 
other expressions of sexual orientation.
Sexual and Gender Minorities
Persons 
whose 
sex, 
gender, 
sexual 
orientation, gender identity and/or gender 
expression differ from those of the majority 
of the surrounding society.
People with Disabilities
People 
who 
have 
mental 
or 
physical 
impairments that adversely affect their ability to 
carry out everyday activities on a substantial, 
long-term basis. These impairments can be 
visible or invisible. Disabilities can affect a 
person’s mobility, manual dexterity, physical 
coordination, continence, ability to lift or carry 
objects, speech, hearing, eyesight, memory, 
and ability to concentrate, learn, or understand. 
Around 15% of the global population has some 
sort of disability, and prevalence is higher in 
developing countries (WHO, 2011).
Important Definitions
KEY SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT 
CONCEPTS
Gender Equality
Equal 
rights, 
responsibilities 
and 
opportunities for people of all genders. 
Equality between women and men is seen 
both as a human rights issue and as a 
precondition for, and indicator of, sustainable 
and people-centered development. Here 
it should be stressed that gender equality 
implies equality for all genders, not just men 
and women.
Gender Equity
Equal outcomes for people of all genders. 
Where gender equality implies people of 
all genders should have the same starting 
point of equal rights, responsibilities, and 
opportunities, gender equity implies that 
they should be enabled to reach an equal 
end-point through the provision of benefits, 
resources, and opportunities that meet their 
specific needs. These benefits, resources, 
and opportunities may be the same or 
different depending on the specific needs 
and challenges faced by people of a certain 
gender, especially when also taking into 
account other factors such as race, ethnicity, 
age, ability, income, and class.
Gender Mainstreaming
Gender Mainstreaming is a process that 
systematically integrates gender perspectives 
into legislation, public policies, programs, 
and projects. This process makes women’s 
concerns 
and 
experiences 
an 
integral 
dimension of the design, implementation, 
monitoring, and evaluation of policies and 
programs in all political, economic, and 
societal spheres with the goal of achieving 
gender equality (United Nations, 2002). The 
World Bank Group’s Gender Group highlights 
gender gaps as a good practice version of 
Gender Mainstreaming.
Gender-Inclusive
An approach that takes an inclusive view of 
gender, considering people of all genders 
and sexualities as well as intersections with 
factors such as race, ethnicity, income, class, 
age, and ability, to ensure the voices of 
people of all genders are heard and integral 
to project design, delivery, and evaluation, 
with the goal of promoting gender equity.
Productive Work
The production of goods and services for 
consumption or trade, in both employment 
and self-employment (Moser, 1993).
Reproductive Work
Reproductive work is seen as the chief and 
“natural” role of women in many regions and 
cultures. In addition to physical childbearing, 
it includes the care, socialization, and 
maintenance of individuals throughout their 
lives to ensure the continuation of society 
to the next generation (Edholm et al., 1978). 
Reproductive work is often invisible, not 
seen as “real” work, and does not have a 
clearly defined start and end (Moser, 1993).
Practical Gender Needs
A concept defined by Caroline Moser 
(1993) relating to gender equality and 
development. 
Practical 
gender 
needs 
are the needs women identify within their 
socially accepted roles in society. These 
needs arise from the gendered division of 
labor and women’s subordinate position 
in society, and meeting these needs does 
not challenge this subordination. Practical 
gender needs are a response to immediate 
perceived necessity, identified within a 
specific context (Moser, 1993).
Strategic Gender Needs
A concept defined by Caroline Moser (1993) 
relating to gender equality and development. 
Strategic gender needs are the needs women 
1.2  Important Definitions

=== Página 10 ===
18
19
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
identify because of their subordinate position 
to men in their society. Strategic gender 
needs vary according to particular contexts. 
They relate to gender divisions of labor, 
power, and control and may include such 
issues as land rights, domestic violence, 
equal wages, and women’s control over 
their bodies. Meeting strategic gender needs 
helps women to achieve greater equality 
(Moser, 1993).
Gender-Based Violence (GBV)
An umbrella term for any harmful act that 
is perpetrated against a person’s will and 
stems from socially ascribed (i.e. gender-
based) differences between males, females, 
and people who do not conform with 
gender norms. GBV includes acts that inflict 
physical, mental, or sexual harm or suffering; 
threats of such acts; and coercion and other 
deprivations of liberty, whether occurring in 
public or private life (IASC Guidelines, 2015, 
modified).
KEY URBAN DEVELOPMENT 
CONCEPTS
Urban Development
An economic, social, and cultural process 
in which an area becomes more urbanized 
and less rural (Henderson, 2003). Urban 
development 
may 
include 
shifts 
in 
employment that rely less on physical labor 
and more on ministerial/administrative labor, 
widespread use of technology and industry, 
and larger, denser human settlements.
Urban Planning
A multi-disciplinary approach to deciding 
where things get build and why. Urban 
planning is concerned with the relationship 
between people and the built environment 
and ensuring the protection of people’s 
general health, safety, and welfare. Planning 
does this by creating and assessing plans 
for the preservation and development of 
commerce, the environment, transportation, 
housing, parks and public spaces, and urban 
design.
Urban Design
The physical shaping of the built environment 
beyond the scale of individual buildings. It is a 
multi-disciplinary practice at the intersection 
of architecture, landscape architecture, 
and urban planning that is concerned with 
enhancing the quality and functionality of 
urban life, while addressing environmental 
and economic needs (Wall and Waterman, 
2010; McHarg, 1992). 
Built Environment
The 
built 
environment 
constitutes 
the 
human-made, physical spaces in which 
human activity takes place. This can include 
buildings, streets, public spaces like parks 
and plazas, transportation systems, and 
land use patterns. The built environment is 
a system that can influence physical and 
mental health, public safety, commerce, and 
traffic patterns (Frank et al., 2003; Handy et 
al., 2002).
Informal Settlements
Residential areas where inhabitants are 
deemed by the authorities to have no 
legal claim to the land they occupy and 
the system of occupation ranges from 
squatting to informal rental housing. In most 
cases, the housing is insecure and poor 
quality and does not comply with current 
planning and building regulations. Informal 
settlements are also often situated in the 
most precarious urban areas where basic 
services and infrastructure, including public 
or green spaces, are limited (UN-HABITAT, 
2013b).
1.2  Important Definitions
Participation
Citizen or community member involvement in 
decision-making processes, which enables 
the “have-not” citizens, who are typically 
excluded 
from 
political 
and 
economic 
processes, to be intentionally included 
in shaping the future in order to share in 
the benefits of an affluent society. It is the 
strategy by which the “have-nots” join in 
determining how information is shared, 
goals and policies are set, tax resources 
are allocated, programs are operated, and 
benefits like contracts and patronage are 
parceled out (Arnstein, 1969). 
Participatory Planning and Design 
The participation of citizens or community 
members in decision-making, joint analysis, 
visioning, and design of the changes in the 
built environment that affect their lives. It 
involves the “co-development” or “co-design” 
of plans and physical interventions with 
community members and technical experts 
to ensure the results meet the needs of the 
end users. 
This handbook has been written to assist in the inclusion of women, girls, and 
sexual and gender minorities of all ages and abilities in urban planning and design 
processes across all World Bank regions. These are groups that have been 
historically under-served and under-represented in the urban planning and design 
fields, resulting in urban environments that do not serve them well. The handbook is 
intended to equally address the inclusion of: 
•	
girls and women of all sexualities, ages, and abilities
•	
boys and men belonging to sexual minority groups and of all ages and abilities
•	
people who do not identify with or fall outside of the gender binary, including 
transgender, nonbinary, queer, and intersex people of all ages and abilities
It is important to note that men and boys can also face specific challenges in the 
build environment. In the interest of focusing on the systemic inequities facing 
women, girls, and sexual and gender minorities in particular, the needs of men and 
boys are not explicitly discussed in this document. However, the good practices, 
engagement techniques, and design guidelines presented in Chapter 4 can also 
be applied to engage men and boys in identifying both challenges and design 
solutions.
WHO DOES “GENDER-INCLUSIVE” REFER TO?
1.2  Important Definitions

=== Página 11 ===
21
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
1.1  How to Use This Guide
Readers of this handbook are likely pressed 
for time and keen to quickly locate the 
information they need. The handbook 
tries to accommodate such constraints, 
with each chapter intended to work well 
in a standalone way and to provide key 
information in a concise and navigable 
format. In particular, readers can approach 
Chapter 4 and Chapter 5 in the second 
half of the handbook as a mix-and-match 
menu of good practices, design standards, 
and case studies that can be retrieved, 
combined, adapted, and applied as relevant 
to projects across a range of contexts and 
issue areas.
How to Use 
This Handbook
At the same time, gender is a cross-
cutting issue that cannot be meaningfully 
addressed if projects and disciplines remain 
siloed. One of the core principles of gender-
inclusive urban planning and design is 
cross-sectoral integration (see Fainstein 
and Servon, 2005, and Chapter 3 of this 
handbook). With this in mind, the reader 
is strongly encouraged to take the time to 
read this handbook, chapter-by-chapter, 
and digest its concepts in order to form a 
deep, overarching understanding of gender-
inclusive urban planning and design.

=== Página 12 ===
22
23
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
1.3  How to Use This Handbook
Chapter 1: Introduction
This introduction has sought to lay out the need for and objectives of the 
handbook, definitions of key terms referenced throughout the handbook, 
and how to get the most out of each chapter.
Chapter 2: Why Gender-Inclusive Planning and Design?
Go to this Chapter for a brief history of modern urban planning and design, 
and to understand how gender biases have been built into the urban realm. 
A conceptual framework lays out the relationship between urban planning 
and design, gender, and social and economic inclusion. Detailed summaries 
of key "issue areas", with key points and useful statistics, help build deep 
knowledge and provide a resource for sharing with clients and consultants. 
At the end of this chapter, readers will find concise information about the 
economic and social costs — and opportunities — at stake.
Chapter 3: Foundations of Gender-Inclusive Planning  
and Design
Turn to Chapter 3 to understand the goals of gender-inclusive planning and 
design, followed by a set of core commitments that enable practitioners 
to make the necessary fundamental shifts in approach towards a more 
inclusive, equitable process. These commitments serve as methodological 
guideposts for World Bank staff and consultants embarking on a gender-
inclusive project.
CHAPTER SUMMARIES
1.3  How to Use This Handbook
Chapter 4: Process, Plan, and Project Guidelines
This chapter contains in-depth guidelines to help World Bank staff and 
consultants both implement a gender-inclusive planning or design process, 
and develop gender-inclusive plans and built projects. Part one sets out a 
series of good practices and activities to ensure each project fully incorporates 
the voices and priorities of women, girls, and sexual and gender minorities of 
all ages and abilities into planning and design. Covering 16 plan and project 
typologies, part two offers clear, practicable design guidelines that will help 
plans and projects meet higher standards for gender inclusion. The contents 
of this chapter are meant to directly inform the drafting of Terms of Reference 
documents and overall project design and delivery.
Chapter 5: Case Studies
Chapter 5 serves to demonstrate how other cities have addressed the goals 
of gender-inclusive urban planning and design, and aims to inspire readers 
to test similar approaches. It comprises a list of 10 case studies of projects 
and plans from a range of typologies, issue areas, and regions, complete with 
clear information on the contexts, activities, and outcomes.
Chapter 6: Conclusion and Further Resources
Turn to the final chapter to find closing comments followed by an extensive 
list of further resources, including similar toolkits and guides; links to World 
Bank gender training materials and a directory of “gender champions” willing 
to provide one-on-one support on this topic; and further reading. A full 
bibliography of sources from this handbook is also given for reference.
CHAPTER SUMMARIES

=== Página 13 ===
25
25
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design, 2020
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
25

=== Página 14 ===
26
27
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
Before the advent of modern planning, European cities were largely designed and planned 
by civil engineers, architects, and public health experts — fields dominated by men (Greed, 
1994). Most productive work during these years took place within or close to the home 
alongside reproductive work (Arendt, 1958), and city growth was largely governed by 
private interests and commerce. However, throughout the European Industrial Revolution, 
productive work shifted from the domestic sphere to factories, and crowded urban slums 
formed nearby. Modern urban planning and zoning were conceived in Western Europe in 
the late 19th century in response to the unsanitary conditions in these neighborhoods and 
the consequent public health issues (Talen, 2012). 
Some theorists have noted how modern planning continued a centuries-old tradition 
of ghettoizing certain groups (see, for e.g. Meck, 2005). In the context of European 
colonialism and Jim Crow in the US, urban planning was closely aligned with racial and 
ethnic segregation (Njoh, 2007; Nightingale, 2016; Silver, 1997). Moreover, in the patriarchal 
Western societies of the late 19th and early 20th Centuries, planning and urban design 
continued to be fields dominated by wealthy men. As such, cities were, in many ways, 
delineated along the lines of gender as well as race and class.
Taking the able-bodied, working male as the “neutral” user of the city, male planners 
and designers — whether intentionally or unintentionally — created urban spaces that 
catered to their needs, while reflecting and perpetuating the patriarchal gender norms 
of their society: one that designated men as breadwinners, with full access to the public 
realm, land, and housing; and women as caregivers, relegated to the private realm of the 
household and deprived of land-based assets (Fainstein and Servon, 2005; Moser, 1993). 
Through colonization, gendered norms such as these were imposed upon and adopted by 
colonial territories throughout the world, with the resulting policies and practices sometimes 
replacing markedly different norms such as collective land ownership, as seen in Australia 
and Kenya (Watson, 2009; Guyo, 2017), and matrilineal inheritance as seen in Ghana 
(Selase et al., 2015).
In this way, urban environments around the world became both products and drivers of 
patriarchal gender roles and inequities, with workplaces separated from housing; male 
workers’ mobility prioritized over that of female caregivers; and women (and sexual and 
gender minorities) left feeling that they do not belong in the public realm: that the space 
is not theirs. Ingrained in planning and design theory and practice, these heterosexist 
assumptions were not recognized and challenged in a significant way until the 1970’s, 
when feminist scholars from the US and Europe began to analyze the ways in which 
planning and design had excluded the needs of women (Fainstein and Servon, 2005).
Over the next two decades, numerous developments in urban planning and design theory 
helped shed light on gender gaps in the built environment. Scholars such as Dolores 
Hayden, Gerda Werkerle, and Gwendoline Wright published numerous articles and books 
on the gender inequities that had been built into the urban environment, studying issues 
of mobility, safety, land ownership, and access to services and employment. The concept 
of Crime Prevention through Environmental Design (CPTED), put forth by C. Ray Jeffery 
History of Gender in Modern 
Urban Planning and Design
(1971) and Oscar Newman (1972), raised awareness of how design features can either 
facilitate or help prevent crime, including gender-based violence (GBV). At the same time, 
the emergence of the Women in Development movement and similar initiatives (discussed 
in greater detail opposite) centered the inclusion of women in decision-making, data 
collection, and development processes (Moser, 1993).
In response to these theoretical developments, cities such as Toronto and Vienna led 
the way in incorporating gender considerations into their planning and design processes 
during the 1980’s and 1990’s. Important projects such as the Frauen-Werk-Stadt (Women-
Work-City) development in Vienna (completed in 1997, see case study in Chapter 5) and 
the Women in Safe Environments (WISE) report in Toronto (1987) explored how urban 
planning and design can help ease the burden of caregiving for women and promote their 
safety in the public realm. In more recent years, scholars such as Ki Namaste (1996) 
and Petra Doan (2007) have begun to expand studies of gender and the urban realm, 
highlighting how sexual and gender minorities face related challenges to safety and access 
in cities.
2.1  History of Gender in Modern Urban Planning and Design

=== Página 15 ===
29
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
28
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
2.1  History of Gender in Modern Urban Planning and Design
The “Women in Development” (WID) movement originated in the early 1970’s, when several 
female development professionals began to challenge the assumption that economic 
development impacted women and men in the same ways. Focusing on the critical 
potential of women’s productive labor in economic development, and how their oppression 
limited economic growth, they sought to demonstrate the “missed opportunity” of women’s 
empowerment. Significantly, they highlighted the need for gender-disaggregated data and 
the importance of women participating in development rather than being seen as passive 
beneficiaries (UNDP, 2003).
Women and Development (WAD) began to emerge in the second half of the 1970’s, 
largely in response to the WID movement’s failure to acknowledge women’s existing role 
in development, and the fact that women’s subordinate position in society was a barrier to 
successful development. They suggested women-only development projects could be a 
solution to overcome patriarchal imbalances. However, WAD was criticized for continuing to 
only consider women’s productive labor, and for conceptualizing women as a homogeneous 
group.
WAD eventually gave way to Gender and Development (GAD), a framework that for the 
first time focused on the social construction of gender relations, rather than considering 
women in isolation. GAD proponents conducted gender analysis to understand the systemic 
oppression of women, emphasizing cultural context, the impacts of colonialism, and the 
need to transform adverse masculinity norms that perpetuate violence by promoting more 
positive models of male identity. Focusing on the gendered division of labor and the balance 
of productive and reproductive work, the GAD movement highlighted the role of men as 
key actors in advancing more equitable gender norms. GAD proponents such as Caroline 
Moser argued that gender was a cross-cutting issue that should inform development policy 
and planning at the highest level.
GENDER AND DEVELOPMENT IN THIS HANDBOOK
Given that the oppression of sexual and gender minorities stems from the same socially-
constructed gender roles as those that oppress women, this handbook follows an expanded 
definition of GAD. In this definition, GAD considers and addresses not only the inequalities 
between women and men, but also between sexual and gender minorities and majorities. In this 
way, “gender” becomes a concept that is cross-cutting, intersectional, and inclusive.
(Sources: Moser, 1993; Miller and Razavi, 1995; Rathgeber, 1990)
FROM WOMEN IN DEVELOPMENT  
TO GENDER AND DEVELOPMENT
Gender in Urban Planning  
and Design Today
Although some cities have made progress in addressing gender biases in the built environment 
over the last three decades, much work remains to be done. There is far less understanding 
of how the built environment works for sexual and gender minorities (Forsyth, 2001; Doan, 
2016) and an ongoing assumption that “gender inclusion” simply means “women’s issues” 
— without taking into account the relationships between genders or the cumulative impacts 
of gender, sexuality, ethnicity, race, income, class, ability, and age. 
Many urban planning and design fields continue to be dominated by men, and as such, 
continue to reflect a one-sided perspective on the urban realm. Women occupy just 10% 
of the highest-ranking jobs at the world's leading architecture firms (Fairs, 2017) and in 
the US, comprise only 13.6% of architects and engineers (CES, 2018). According to the 
US Bureau of Labor Statistics, women make up only 20% of engineering graduates, and 
nearly 40% of these either quit or never enter the profession (Sibley, 2016). These figures 
reflect the general lack of agency and representation for women and sexual and gender 
minorities in decision-making the world over, with women making up only 24.3% of all 
national parliamentarians as of February 2019 (Inter-Parliamentary Union, 2019) and only 
0.1% of US elected officials identifying as LGBT (Victory Institute, 2018). Meanwhile, data 
on people with disabilities in public office is extremely sparse. 
In addition to severe underrepresentation in the planning and design professions, women, 
girls, and sexual and gender minorities of all ages and abilities are also routinely excluded 
from participating in community planning and design processes. This happens for an array of 
reasons — many of them relating to deficiencies in the urban environment that are explored 
in detail in the following section. More broadly, these groups are excluded through economic 
pressures and both externally-enforced and internalized social norms, with Moser (1993) 
stating “because of the way that women are so effectively excluded from real decision-
making, they often choose to withdraw rather than participate in planning processes.”
As a result of this lack of representation, women, girls, and sexual and gender minorities of 
all ages and abilities struggle to make their voices heard and their priorities count in planning 
and design decisions all over the world. The impacts of this ongoing and historical bias in 
who makes planning and design decisions are far-reaching, and ultimately affect nearly every 
aspect of day-to-day life for these groups

=== Página 16 ===
31
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
30
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
It is almost universally understood that 
women, people with disabilities, and sexual 
and gender minorities face significant 
social and economic disadvantages when 
compared with able-bodied, cisgender, 
heterosexual men. What is still not fully 
understood and accepted among many 
urban planning and design practitioners is 
exactly how existing conditions in the built 
environment — and the lack of diversity in 
the voices shaping it — facilitates, feeds 
into, and perpetuates these inequities.
The following section explores six key issues 
Gendered Challenges 
in the Urban Environment
in the built environment that exacerbate and 
reinforce gender inequity, or that represent 
areas in which women, girls, and sexual 
and gender minorities face disproportionate 
burdens thanks to existing social and 
economic inequities. In other words, these 
six issue areas in the built environment 
combine with gender inequity to constrain, 
inconvenience, and even endanger women, 
girls, and sexual and gender minorities of all 
ages and abilities.
1.	 ACCESS
Using services and spaces in the public realm, free from constraints and barriers
2.	 MOBILITY
Moving around the city safely, easily, and affordably
3.	 SAFETY AND FREEDOM FROM VIOLENCE
Being free from real and perceived danger in public and private spheres
4.	 HEALTH AND HYGIENE
Leading an active lifestyle that is free from health risks in the built environment
 
5.	 CLIMATE RESILIENCE
Being able to prepare for, respond to, and cope with the immediate and long-term effects 
of disaster
 
6.	 SECURITY OF TENURE
Accessing and owning land and housing to live, work, and build wealth and agency
KEY ISSUE AREAS WHERE GENDER INEQUITY INTERSECTS 
WITH THE BUILT ENVIRONMENT
2.3  Gendered Challenges in the Urban Environment

=== Página 17 ===
32
33
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
It is important to understand these issue areas as being profoundly interconnected. Clearly, 
each issue touches on the others: for example, poor health will affect mobility and access, 
while increasing risk of death during a climate disaster; loss of tenure will impact climate 
resilience and safety; becoming a victim of violence can affect health as well as reducing 
mobility, and so on. However, this chapter addresses the issue areas one by one in order 
to build a deep understanding of the mechanisms by which the built environment interacts 
with gender inequity.
CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK 
Just as these issue areas are related to each other, they are also key drivers in a wider 
system of social and economic exclusion. The conceptual framework opposite illustrates the 
connections between issues in the built environment, gender bias in planning and design 
processes, and systemic social and economic exclusion.
Although this feedback system between the built environment, social and economic 
exclusion, and the disciplines of planning and design is complex and entrenched, it also 
reveals how urban planning and design can do better. Each of the six issue areas — 
access, mobility, safety and freedom from violence, health and hygiene, climate resilience, 
and security of tenure — has profound economic and social consequences for women, 
girls, and sexual and gender minorities of all ages and abilities. As such, each represents 
a key opportunity to make substantial advances toward gender equity. The final section in 
this chapter presents a summary of these opportunities — and envisions what the possible 
gains could be if cities were gender-inclusive.
The guidelines in Chapter 4 are categorized by plan and project types. Every plan and project 
entry will include a diagram of the issue areas shown here. Presented as a “wheel”, these 
diagrams will be color-coded to quickly highlight which issue areas are of most importance 
for a given type of plan or project and should therefore be the focus of Monitoring, Evaluation, 
Accountability, and Learning (MEAL).
2.3  Gendered Challenges in the Urban Environment
COMBATS
COMBATS
LACK OF AGENCY + 
REPRESENTATION IN
PLANNING + DESIGN
A GENDER -BIASED 
BUILT ENVIRONMENT
REDUCED...
CONTRIBUTE TO
 SOCIAL + ECONOMIC 
EXCLUSION
CREATE CONDITIONS FOR
CREATE CONDITIONS FOR
LEADS TO
RESULTS IN
GENDER-INCLUSIVE 
URBAN PLANNING + 
DESIGN
Climate 
Resilience
Access
Safety + Freedom 
from Violence
Health + 
Hygiene
Mobility
Security 
of Tenure
Conceptual framework of gender 
and the built environment
2.3  Gendered Challenges in the Urban Environment

=== Página 18 ===
34
35
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
KEY POINTS
•	
Cities have been planned and designed to reflect traditional gender roles and 
the gendered division of labor, especially through modern zoning
•	
The consequent separation of public and private spaces contributes to 
restrictions on women’s, girls’, and sexual and gender minorities’ access to the 
public realm
•	
Spatial segregation and inadequate infrastructure create a disproportionate 
time burden for caregivers, who are primarily women
•	
Public spaces often cater primarily to straight, able-bodied men and are less 
accessible to women and sexual and gender minorities, especially those with 
disabilities, as well as men and boys affected by urban violence
Cities around the world have been designed, planned, and built along the lines of traditional 
gender roles. Typical spatial planning, zoning, and land use policies and practices create 
legal divisions between “industrial” and “commercial” zones of production, commerce, 
income generation, and public life; and “residential” zones of homemaking, reproduction, 
care, and private life. These spatial divisions are deeply rooted in gendered divisions of 
labor — the distinction between “productive” income-generating work, typically seen as 
male, and unpaid “reproductive” work, considered the realm of women (See Benston, 
1969; Federici, 1975 and 2018; Kerber, 1988; Ferguson and McNally, 2013; Fraser, 2016). 
However, the view that “work” solely constitutes the set of activities that generate income, 
and that “home” is a private place of respite from those activities, is a deeply biased view 
that overlooks and devalues the hard labor and unpaid care work that often falls on the 
shoulders of women and girls (See Greed, 1994; Bhattacharya, 2017; Pojani et al., 2018). 
A study in Cordoba, Argentina, for example, found that although men and women spent 
about the same total amount of time working, women’s contributions went unpaid and 
unrecognized because domestic tasks — which they spent three times more time than men 
doing — were considered their traditional role (Falu and Rainero, 2002). 
The spatial division of public and private realms also creates additional burdens on women’s 
time and energy. Women often devote more time, about 5-13 hours a week, to caregiving 
activities (Lee and Waite, 2005), essentially creating a second job or “double shift” in addition 
to any income-generating work (Hochschild, 1989). In many cities, commercial, residential, 
and industrial zones are not only formally segregated, but often physically far away from one 
another, further burdening women with greater distances to travel for multiple duties. For 
women and girls in informal settlements, often located on the periphery of cities, inadequate 
infrastructure and the distance between key resources and housing increases time spent on 
caregiving chores, directly reducing access to employment and educational opportunities. 
Several studies have linked time spent collecting water and fuelwood with decreased school 
attendance, with Nauges and Strand (2013) noting that in Ghana, halving the amount of 
time spent fetching water increases girls’ school attendance by 2.4 percentage points on 
average. In this way, the built environment is often “stacked against” women and girls rather 
Access
2.3  Gendered Challenges in the Urban Environment
than working to accommodate their needs.
Furthermore, even seemingly minor design deficiencies can prevent women, girls, and 
sexual and gender minorities from fully accessing or feeling welcome within the public 
realm, despite the fact that women have been shown to use streets and public spaces 
more frequently and for a greater variety of purposes than men (UN-HABITAT, 2015). 
Many women around the world have internalized feelings of discomfort in public spaces, as 
documented in Ranade’s 2007 study in Mumbai, which found that women and girls rarely 
linger in public spaces — instead using them to get from one point to another and often 
fabricating a sense of purpose to do so. Furthermore, Ranade found that women avoided 
certain places, like bars and lottery shops, both out of safety concerns and in order to not 
be seen as “loose” women. Another study in Kampala found that “children and women 
face special challenges in accessing open spaces for recreational purposes; football takes 
up much of the space and is dominated by male adults — especially in the afternoon and 
evening hours.” Respondents underlined the lack of amenities such as toilets as an issue 
for women, the elderly, and those with children, and also “stressed that children and women 
were sometimes intimidated when trying to reserve space for sports, and may have difficulty 
defending themselves in disputes regarding use of the grounds.” Women were 15% less 
likely to use public spaces as a result (APS, 2015).  Such barriers occur both in the physical 
public realm and the virtual: in Indonesia, girls aged 15-24 are half as likely as boys and 
young men to use the internet, with parental restrictions on girls’ use of public space limiting 
their access to internet cafés (Khosla, 2009;  Perrons, 2004). 
For sexual and gender minorities, the sense of discomfort in public can be even more acute 
due to their perceived transgression of gender roles and norms. The 2015 U.S. Transgender 
Survey found that in the previous year, 31% of respondents who visited a place providing 
a public service where staff thought they were transgender were denied equal treatment, 
harassed, or physically assaulted. Twenty per cent of all respondees did not use at least 
one type of public service in the past year because they feared they would be mistreated 
as a transgender person, and 46% had been verbally harassed in the past year for being 
transgender (James et al., 2016). Evidence from 7 countries in Southeastern Europe 
demonstrates that LGBTI people tend to stay away from where there is a greater probability 
of being surrounded by many unknown people including streets, squares, public transport, 
cafes, restaurants, clubs, public premises, building, parks, and other public places (World 
Bank, 2018). In Latin America, the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights reports 
that same-sex couples showing public displays of affection are a frequent target of police 
abuse and arbitrary detention by state agents because of what is considered “immoral 
behavior” in public spaces (IACHR, 2015). This can compound with the challenges posed 
by disability: disabled sexual and gender minorities were found in a US study to be more 
likely than non-disabled sexual and gender minorities to avoid public spaces (20.4% versus 
9.1%); avoid getting services they or their families needed (14.7% versus 2.9%); and make 
specific decisions about where to shop (25.7% versus 15.4%) (Singh and Durso, 2017). 
This pervasive yet often under-perceived lack of comfort within public spaces leaves many 
women and sexual and gender minorities, especially if they have a disability, invisible and 
voiceless in the public realm.

=== Página 19 ===
36
37
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
2.3  Gendered Challenges in the Urban Environment
Mobility
KEY POINTS
•	
Transit and transportation systems are often shaped by male-dominated 
commuting patterns that do not serve the complex needs of female caregivers
•	
Women are more likely to walk or use transit, and to have physically limited 
mobility
•	
Women and sexual and gender minorities face considerable safety concerns on 
public transport
•	
Women often spend longer traveling and pay more for transit due to the 
complexity of their travel needs and safety concerns
•	
Limited mobility is directly linked to reduced economic opportunity
Transportation planning is ostensibly demand-driven, but the demands of men, especially as 
relating to their commuting patterns, have historically taken precedence over those of women. 
Transit routes are therefore primarily designed to move workers from the “private” household 
— often on the urban periphery — to the “public” realm of the workplace at peak hours, in 
sync with the typical work day (see Wekerle, 1980). Women are often more likely to work in 
the informal economy (Bonnet et al., 2019) and usually devote substantially more time than 
men to domestic tasks and reproductive work (Ferrant et al., 2014). They are also less likely to 
have access to a car (Kunieda and Gauthier, 2007) and more likely to use public transportation 
IMPORTANT STATISTICS
•	
In 17 countries, married women cannot travel outside the home in the 
same way as married men (World Bank, 2016)
•	
104 economies around the world have some form of restriction on 
women’s work, with about 2.75 billion women denied access to the same 
opportunities as men (Iqbal, 2018)
•	
In the US, 1 in 5 transgender people avoided using a public service for 
fear of harassment (James et al., 2016)
•	
Across Europe, 50% of LGBTQ individuals surveyed reported avoiding 
public spaces because of fear of harassment (FRA, 2013)
(CIVITAS, 2014, Nurdden et al., 2007, IDB, 2016), often combining multiple stops and tasks into 
more complex trips (Peters, 2001; McGuckin et al., 2005; Skinner and Borlaug, 1980) and making 
shorter journeys at more variable, off-peak times (Ng and Acker, 2018; Kunieda and Gauthier, 
2007). These needs are often excluded from transit planning in terms of routes, timetables, and 
payment options, because conventional research trades conventional transit research tracks 
employment-related trips as a discrete category, with care-related trips concealed across several 
categories like “shopping,” “leisure,” “escorting,” etc. Fortunately, new approaches to segmenting 
trip-demand data may be paving the way for more inclusive, flexible transit that accommodates 
primarily female caregivers when grouping care-related tasks into one category, these often 
rival employment-related trips, as seen in Spain where 30% of trips — of all modalities — were 
employment-related and 25% care-related (Sánchez de Madariaga, 2013), or in the US, where 
just 16% of trips are tied to work commutes (AASHTO, 2013).
As well as being more likely to use transit, women are more likely to walk (Peters, 2001), and 
to be slower walkers for a number of reasons — meaning poor infrastructure such as uneven 
paving or a lack of crossings and curb cuts can disproportionately limit their mobility. Around 
the world, women are more likely to reach old age and are more likely than men (38% versus 
27%) to report mobility difficulty (Mechakra-Tahiri et al., 2012) and to have a disability (Okoro et 
al., 2016). These physical mobility challenges are often not catered for in the built environment, 
likely contributing to the high levels of social isolation reported by these groups. For example, in 
a US survey of 800 disabled and elderly people and 500 caregivers in California, 10% said they 
got out “almost never” and the majority left home less than once every 3 days (Decker, 2006). 
Moreover, as primary caregivers, women often walk with bags, children, or elders in tow which 
can create an additional challenge in navigating infrastructure and transit (Kunieda and Gauthier, 
2007; Hoai and Schlyter 2010). Factors such as these can make journeys on foot take up to three 
times longer (see Meschik, 1995).
Women’s and sexual and gender minorities’ access to transportation is perhaps most restricted 
by safety concerns, with research consistently underscoring the many ways in which these limit 
mobility. For example, women are more likely to consider not going out after dark (Hsu, 2011), not 
walking alone (Keane, 1998), not using public transit (Lynch and Atkins, 1988), and not choosing 
specific routes (Machin and Lucas, 2004) in order to avoid putting themselves at risk of violence. 
In a multi-country study from the Middle East and North Africa, 40-60% of women said they had 
experienced street-based sexual harassment and 31-64% of men said they had carried out such 
acts (El Feki et al., 2017). Evidence from Mexico City for example indicates that 1 in 2 Mexican 
women have been victims of harassment on public transport (Fraser et al., 2017), and that 3 in 4 
women feel insecure when travelling through the city (INEGI, 2011 and 2014), rising to nearly 9 
in 10 on public transport (CDMX, 2016). In Sri Lanka, 90% of women reported being subjected 
to sexual harassment in public transportation (UNFPA, 2017). According to the 2015 Violence 
Against Women Survey in Bangladesh, the third most likely location for sexual violence after 
their place of work and their husbands’ home was vehicles/roads/streets (Bangladesh Bureau 
of Statistics, 2016). In a US study, 45% of transgender travelers have reported fearing physical 
or verbal abuse/harassment while traveling (Community Marketing, 2014). Customs around 
“appropriate” behavior for women and sexual and gender minorities can also restrict mobility. In 
Dhaka, where the “purdah” custom of female seclusion curtails women’s access to public spaces 
and services, a ban on cycle rickshaws to improve conditions for motorized transit severely 
reduced women’s mobility. This was because unlike rickshaws — primarily single-occupancy 
vehicles that maintain privacy — buses are a public form of transport; bus drivers and other 
passengers often simply refused to let women board (Zohir, 2003).
2.3  Gendered Challenges in the Urban Environment

=== Página 20 ===
38
39
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
2.3  Gendered Challenges in the Urban Environment
IMPORTANT STATISTICS
•	
In Latin America and the Caribbean, over 50% of public transport users are 
women (IDB, 2016)
•	
In the US, having a child under age 5 increases the likelihood of taking trips 
with multiple stops, also known as trip chaining, by 54% for working women 
but only 19% for working men (McGuckin et al., 2005)
•	
In developing countries, lack of access to and safety of transport reduces 
the probability of women’s participation in the labor force by 16.5% (ILO, 
2017)
Safety and Freedom 
from Violence
KEY POINTS
•	
The social-spatial division of public from private contributes to the violent 
“policing” of women, girls, and sexual and gender minorities in the public realm
•	
Non-intimate partner violence against women is higher in cities, and 
particularly informal settlements, than in rural areas
•	
Planning and design factors such as poor sanitation and lighting contribute to 
violence and fear of violence, curtailing mobility and access to the public realm
•	
The built environment may also contribute to factors correlating with domestic 
violence
These limitations on mobility have marked repercussions on women’s economic status, 
including their ability to access education and employment. In Delhi, studies have indicated that 
women choose lower-quality universities over higher-rated programs and pay significantly higher 
transportation costs in order to take perceived, safer routes to reach them (Borker, 2018). In 
developing countries, lack of access to and safety of transport reduce the probability of women’s 
participation in the labor force by 16.5% (ILO, 2017). 
The spatial segregation of public and private spaces not only makes women, girls, and sexual 
and gender minorities often feel like they don’t belong in the public realm — for many around the 
world, being in public is also accompanied by a very real risk of violence. Although the majority 
of Gender-Based Violence (GBV) affects women in the domestic context, 7.2% of women 
around the world have been assaulted by someone other than an intimate partner (WHO, 2013), 
with this kind of violence tending to be higher in urban areas (McIlwaine, 2013; Tacoli, 2012) 
and especially  informal settlements (Hindin and Adair, 2002). In 8 Eastern European countries, 
10% of surveyed women reported the most serious incident of non-partner violence occurring 
in the street, a square, parking lot, or other public place (OSCE, 2018). Meanwhile, sexual 
orientation consistently ranks as the third-highest motivator for hate crime incidents around the 
world (Marzullo and Libman, 2009),  with one study finding 90% of lesbian women in Quito, 
Ecuador had suffered abuse in their neighborhoods on account of "lesbophobia" (Benavides 
et al., 2007). In Europe, 23% of non-heterosexual women have experienced sexual or physical 
non-intimate partner violence compared to only 5% of heterosexual women (FRA, 2014). In 7 
countries in Southeastern Europe, 18% of surveyed LGBTI people reported experiencing the 
most serious case of harassment in public places such as streets, square, car parking lot, etc 
(World Bank, 2018). Transgender people were almost twice as likely to be harassed in public 
places (30%). Violence in public institutions is also a serious concern for transgender people: a 
study of transgender women from four Latin American countries found 85.1% had experienced 
GBV in education; 82.9% in healthcare; 80% from police; and 66.1% in other state institutions 
(Lanham et al., 2019). These figures show that being in public can be very dangerous for women 
and sexual and gender minorities, particularly those seen to transgress “traditional” gender 
behaviors (see Namaste, 1996). 
Although primarily a phenomenon driven by social norms, GBV in the public realm is enabled 
by a number of physical factors in the built environment. Violence against women in public has 
been found most likely to occur at and around toilets, at schools, in drinking bars, and in secluded 
areas such as narrow lanes and open fields (Tacoli, 2012). In Guatemala City, women living in 
one poor community reported being afraid to go near “cantinas” (bars) because they thought 
they would be raped or men would expose themselves to them or try and “touch them” (Moser 
and Mcilwaine, 2004). In informal settlements such as those in Nairobi (Amnesty International, 
2010), Cape Town (Gonsalves et al., 2015), and Mumbai and Pune in India (Bapat and Agarwal, 
2003), women and girls have been found to face significant risk of violence if they walk alone 
to use sanitation facilities, especially at night and if toilets are located far from dwellings. Where 
dwellings are flimsy and there are no security patrols, women may also be especially vulnerable 
to break-ins, theft, and rape in their own homes (Hughes and Wickeri, 2011). In addition, poor 
lighting, limited “sight lines”, overcrowded transit, deserted areas, enclosed spaces, and other 
design shortcomings may facilitate violence and also provoke feelings of fear for women, girls, 
and sexual and gender minorities, especially at night (Valentine,1990). Many studies have 
shown how this fear limits mobility and access in a significant way, with women and sexual and 
gender minorities less able to move freely within the public realm (see, for e.g., Ranade, 2007; 
APS, 2015; Hsu, 2011; Keane, 1998; Lynch and Atkins, 1988; Machin and Lucas, 2004) and 
more likely than men to make adaptations to their routines and lifestyles in response to crime-
related fear (Keown, 2010). In Mexico City, for example, a survey found that 70% of women 
modified their daily routines in order to avoid harassment, including “missing, being late to, or 
having to change jobs or schools, and even moving from one neighborhood to another to avoid 
being catcalled or groped” (Singh, 2018).
2.3  Gendered Challenges in the Urban Environment

=== Página 21 ===
40
41
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
IMPORTANT STATISTICS
•	
35 per cent of women have experienced physical and/or sexual violence 
in their lifetime (UN Women, 2016), 7.2% by a non-intimate partner (WHO, 
2013)
•	
Sexual orientation is the third-highest motivator for hate crime incidents 
(Marzullo et al., 2009)
•	
Violence against women alone costs around 2% of global GDP — 
equivalent to $1.5 trillion, approximately the size of the economy of 
Canada (UN Women, 2016)
Intimate partner violence (IPV) affects 30% of women globally (WHO, 2017) and an even higher 
proportion of sexual and gender minorities, while women with disabilities were found in one 
Australian study to suffer sexual violence at a rate three times higher than women without 
(Dowse et al., 2016). IPV has been found to correlate with low levels of women’s education and 
employment, possibly because of reduced bargaining power and agency within households 
(see, for e.g., Marium, 2014). In countries where women rely on male partners to access land 
and housing, it can be harder to escape IPV. One study in India found 49% of women who 
did not own property reported some form of long-term physical violence, compared to only 
18% of women who owned land, 10% of those who owned a house, and 7% of those who 
owned both (Agarwal and Panda, 2007; for more information see case study in Chapter 5). As 
such, improving access and mobility to support economic opportunity, and above all, ensuring 
women’s and sexual and gender minorities’ security of tenure, are key strategies for combating 
IPV through urban planning and design.
GBV is one of the main reasons for persistent gender inequality and a severe human rights 
violation, threatening physical and mental health and drastically reducing the agency, freedom, 
and economic opportunity of women, girls, and sexual and gender minorities. Altogether, the 
UN has estimated that violence against women alone costs the global economy $1.5 trillion 
per year — a figure that could be even higher when factoring in violence against sexual and 
gender minorities (UN-Women, 2016). Evidence from a study in India suggests that stigma and 
exclusion of LGBT people can lead to lower levels of human capital, decreased productivity, and 
lower economic output, with an estimated $7.7 billion lost from GDP (World Bank, 2014).
2.3  Gendered Challenges in the Urban Environment
Health  
and Hygiene
KEY POINTS
•	
Reduced access to the public realm, and the spaces and services within, limit 
opportunities to lead a healthy, active lifestyle
•	
Inadequate sanitation infrastructure poses severe health risks for women and girls, 
especially if they have disabilities
•	
As primary caregivers who often carry water, cook indoors, and handle waste, 
women and girls are disproportionately affected by inadequate or poorly-designed 
infrastructure
With reduced access to the public realm in general, women and sexual and gender minorities, 
especially those with disabilities, are often less able to lead healthy, active lifestyles and to 
access healthcare. In particular, public space and park access are consistently linked to lower 
rates of chronic disease and obesity, increased happiness and wellbeing, and longer lifespans 
(see, for e.g., Aspinall et al., 2015; Beyer et al., 2014; Roe et al., 2013; Thompson et al., 2012; 
Hobbs et al., 2017), but lack of mobility, access, and comfort in such spaces may explain why, 
globally, 32% of adult women are insufficiently physically active compared to only 23% of men 
(WHO, 2016a). Lack of access and mobility likely also contribute to disproportionate levels of 
social isolation among the elderly and people with disabilities (see Decker, 2006; Graciani et 
al., 2004) as well as sexual and gender minorities — which is linked to mental health problems 
(Semlyen et al., 2016) and an overall increase in mortality (Steptoe et al., 2013; Holt-Lunstad et 
al., 2015). More broadly, living conditions contribute to mental health and wellbeing, with recent 
evidence from Cape Town demonstrating a higher prevalence of Common Mental Disorders in 
periurban informal settlements (35%) compared with rural areas (27%), and that being female 
is one of the three most common correlates, along with unemployment and substance abuse 
(Harpham, 2009).
Twenty six per cent of people globally (WHO, 2019b) do not have access to basic sanitation 
services, creating severe health burdens for women and girls in particular. In Delhi, Meerut, 
Indore, and Nagpur, India, between one-third and one-half of poor households are forced to 
practice open defecation, where bodily waste is left exposed, including in uncovered pit latrines 
(Kar and Chambers, 2008). Sanitation “solutions” such as these raise the risk of diarrheal 
disease, parasitic infections, and urinary and reproductive tract infections (see, for e.g., Phillips-
Howard et al., 2011). Many studies from Asia and Africa have shown that poor sanitation keeps 
girls from school, or interferes with their ability to learn, when they are menstruating (Sommer, 
2010; McMahon et al., 2011; Long et al., 2015); while proper water and sanitation infrastructure 
are considered vital for reducing maternal mortality rates (Songa, 2015). Since girls and women 
need to use toilets more often for urination and menstrual hygiene, they often suffer an additional 
cost burden when accessing pay-per-use toilets and latrines in informal settlements, as noted 
by Kwiringira et al., (2014) in Uganda. Consequently, they may go without drinking and relieving 
themselves for long periods of time, or use plastic bags and buckets when they cannot access a 
toilet, putting them and their families at greater risk of illness (Winter et al., 2019). For women and 
girls with disabilities these burdens are even more severe, due to physical mobility issues, social 

=== Página 22 ===
42
43
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
stigma, and various other challenges, contributing to drastically high rates of unemployment 
and school drop-out among these groups (Groce et al., 2011).
Girls and women also perform a number of caregiving tasks that carry severe health risks, often 
exacerbated by the built environment. Fetching water — a task carried out by women and girls 
the vast majority of the time — takes an average of 25 minutes in urban sub-Saharan Africa, 
19 minutes in urban Asia, and longer in many other countries (UNICEF, 2016). This chore can 
lead to chronic fatigue, spinal and pelvic deformities, and reproductive health problems (see, for 
e.g. Geere and Paul, 2019) as well as taking up huge amounts of energy — 85% of a woman’s 
daily energy intake in Kenya, for example (Duncan, 2007). Women and girls are also often those 
tasked with handling wastewater, which can expose them to infectious pathogens (Watts, 2004, 
Wendland et al., 2017). In many regions, indoor cooking with dirty fuels and poorly-ventilated 
housing contributes to chronic respiratory diseases and lower respiratory infections. In a survey 
in Accra, Ghana, nearly 30% of poor women reported respiratory problems in the two weeks 
prior, which was more than twice the rate among women of middling income, and ten times that 
of wealthy women (Sverdlik, 2011).
IMPORTANT STATISTICS
•	
Globally, 32% of adult women are insufficiently physically active compared to 
only 23% of men (WHO, 2016a)
•	
2.3 billion people worldwide lack even a basic sanitation service, affecting 
girls and women disproportionately (WHO and UNICEF, 2017)
•	
Girls and women make up 72% of those tasked with collecting water around 
the world (WHO and UNICEF, 2015)
•	
Respiratory infections are the leading cause of death for girls aged 10-14, 
who are often indoors and around dirty fuels (WHO, 2016b) 
•	
In 2015, poor sanitation cost the equivalent of 0.9% of global GDP, with the 
figure rising to 5.2% of GDP for India (LIXIL, 2016)
2.3  Gendered Challenges in the Urban Environment
Climate 
Resilience
KEY POINTS
•	
Women, girls, and sexual and gender minorities are more susceptible to climate risk 
due to poverty and lower socioeconomic status, especially in informal areas
•	
Women and girls are more at risk of death during and following disasters due to 
caregiving responsibilities and their likelihood of being trapped in the home
•	
Climate disaster can cause women to lose tenure and give up economic assets, 
trapping them in a cycle of vulnerability
•	
The longer-term impacts of climate disaster are more deeply felt for women due to 
increased caregiving burdens and risk of Gender-Biased Violence (GBV)
Women, especially if they have disabilities, are more susceptible to the effects of climate change 
and natural disasters as a result of gender inequality (Reckien et al., 2007; Gokhale, 2008). Several 
underlying factors — which interact with conditions in the built environment — exacerbate their 
vulnerability to the impacts of climate disasters, such as lack of means to recoup lost assets, limited 
livelihood options, restricted access to education and basic services, and in many cases, socio-
cultural norms (Trohanis et al., 2012). Taking a sample of up to 141 countries over the period of 
1981-2002, a 2007 study showed that natural disasters and their subsequent impact, on average, 
killed more women than men or killed women at an earlier age than men — and that this disparity 
directly related to women’s lower socio-economic status (Neumayer and Plümper, 2007).
 Perhaps the biggest factor is poverty (Romero-Lankao and Tribbia, 2009) which disproportionately 
affects girls and women of childbearing age, especially in sub-Saharan Africa (Sánchez-Páramo 
and Munoz-Boudet, 2018), as well as sexual and gender minorities (see, for e.g., Zweynert, 2015; 
Badgett, 2014) and people with disabilities (WHO, 2011). In particular, the link between poverty and 
climate vulnerability is heightened in informal settlements and other low-income neighborhoods 
where basic infrastructure is lacking, disproportionately impacting women, girls, and people with 
disabilities. In some informal settlements women even outnumber men, such as in the flood and 
typhoon-prone Tondo district of Manila, where they make up 80% of inhabitants (Brot für die 
Welt, 2009), and in India where, in informal settlements, there are 1.5 times more women over 
the age of 50 than men of the same cohort in informal settlements (Harriss-White et al., 2013). 
Houses in informal settlements are typically poorly-constructed and can be severely damaged 
by floods, landslides, storms, and other disasters (Trohanis et al., 2012). Within these already 
precarious settlements, rents are often cheaper along flood-prone riparian zones and may attract 
more female-headed households with lower incomes, as seen in Kibera, Nairobi (Mulligan et al., 
2016) — putting women and their families at further risk. Women who do not own their housing 
may also be unable to make necessary home improvements to prepare for disasters.
Besides often being more likely to live in climate-vulnerable housing, women and girls can be 
at increased climate risk due to their primary caregiving responsibilities, and the consequent 
decrease in mobility and access. Since women are more likely to be at home caring for children 
and relatives when a disaster happens, they are often physically less able to evacuate, which can 
increase fatalities among women and especially those with disabilities (see for instance Bartlett et 
al., 2009; and Walter, 2006). These are contributing factors behind the fact that women made up 

=== Página 23 ===
44
45
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
61% of fatalities in Myanmar after Cyclone Nargis in 2008, 91% after Cyclone Gorky in Bangladesh 
in 1991, and 70% after the 2004 Indian Ocean Tsunami in Banda Aceh, where women’s mobility 
was further hampered by the fact that unlike men, they had not been taught to swim (Trohanis et 
al., 2012).
 Disasters destroy housing and livelihoods, causing many women to lose income from home-
based work, and often, to lose land tenure. Widowed women and orphans have been found 
especially vulnerable to losing land rights, especially in countries where land can be inherited by 
a man’s brother or eldest son rather than his wife. Following the 2005 earthquake in Pakistan, 
many women were left landless while male relatives inherited land and collected compensation 
from the relief program (Real and Handmer, 2010). The 2015 earthquake in Kathmandu, Nepal 
resulted in nearly 1 in 4 female respondents to an Oxfam survey losing property papers (Oxfam, 
2016). Compounding this, women and girls often give up economic assets more readily than 
male household members to act as “buffers” and protect the family following disaster (Oxfam, 
2019). The burden of caregiving tasks following disaster also increases (Enarson et al., 2007), 
likely thanks to damages in basic infrastructure and the consequently reduced accessibility of key 
resources and services.
Finally, there is a clear link between increased GBV and disaster, often exacerbated by poorly-
organized shelter, reduced access to key resources, and an overall atmosphere of chaos (Sullivan, 
2017; Davis et al., 2005). After the Loma Prieta earthquake in California, US, reports of sexual 
violence rose by 300% (Commission for the Prevention of Violence Against Women, 1989); 
substantial rises in GBV have also been documented following Hurricane Katrina in Louisiana, 
US and other earthquakes, tsunamis, and eruptions around the world (Klein, 2008) and can 
cause women to avoid using shelters (Davis et al., 2005). Conditions in the built environment that 
facilitate violence and provoke a fear of violence likely increase following a natural disaster due to 
damages to infrastructure such as roads, powerlines, lighting, and buildings.
Climate disaster heightens existing gender inequities — especially in terms of access, mobility, 
safety, health, and security of tenure — and disproportionately affects women and girls, especially 
those with disabilities, as a result. Improving the built environment, especially in informal 
settlements, is critical to reducing the impacts of climate change on women, girls, and sexual and 
gender minorities.
2.3  Gendered Challenges in the Urban Environment
IMPORTANT STATISTICS
•	
Between 1981 and 2002, natural disasters killed more women than men or 
killed women at an earlier age than men (Neumayer and Plümper, 2007)
•	
People with disabilities are 2-4 times more likely to be injured or die in the 
case of a disaster (United Nations, 2019)
•	
In the US, GBV rates have been found to rise threefold following natural 
disasters (Commission for the Prevention of Violence Against Women, 
1989; Anastario et al., 2009)
Security 
of Tenure
KEY POINTS
•	
Women around the world do not have the same rights to property as men
•	
Tenure often relies on male relations, leaving women and sexual and gender 
minorities vulnerable to exploitation, gender-based violence, and eviction 
•	
Land tenure is especially vulnerable in informal settlements
•	
Limited land rights bar women and sexual and gender minorities from accessing 
services tied to land ownership and limit their ability to generate income and 
accumulate wealth
•	
Insecurity of tenure prevents women and sexual and gender minorities from 
supporting their families' health and exercising agency in local decision-making
Land serves as a key input for agricultural production, a requirement to access many financial 
resources or social services, an income generator, a means to establish safe and secure space 
for housing, and perhaps most importantly, a way to assert one’s right to the city and to participate 
in planning and decision-making processes. However, despite the critical role of land ownership, 
many women across the globe are still excluded from this right. Close to 40% of the world’s 
economies have at least one legal constraint on women’s rights to property, limiting their ability to 
own, manage, and inherit land, while 36 economies have different inheritance rights for widows 
and widowers (World Bank, 2019), leaving many women dependent on the benevolence of a 
male relative, and sometimes homeless (COHRE, 2008). Furthermore, the specifics of marital 
and inheritance regimes matter greatly for the women’s share of couple wealth. In Ghana and 
Karnataka, India, the marital regime of separation of property disadvantages married women, 
concentrating major assets in men’s hands (Deere et al., 2013). Practices that evict women 
after the death of a spouse (Benavides et al., 2007) or bar them from accessing land or housing 
without a man’s involvement (World Bank, 2019) pose particular threats to widows as well as 
single and homosexual women. A study in Quito, Ecuador for example, found that the majority 
of lesbian women rented single-occupancy accommodation and faced stigma that limited their 
ability to secure housing (Benavides et al., 2007). Even when women hold individual land titles, 
these are more at risk of being sold in times of crisis (UN-HABITAT, 2011).
Although land rights are mostly defined at the national level and may seem to be an issue 
primarily affecting women in rural areas, many women face specific challenges in urban and 
periurban contexts, especially in informal settlements. For example, land tenure in rural Ghana is 
customary by nature (owned and managed by tribes, clans, and families), whereas in periurban 
areas, the pluralistic mixture of customary and statutory acquisition processes are particularly 
difficult for women to navigate. In both Nigeria and Ghana, women in periurban areas have 
indicated lower perception of tenure security than those in rural areas (Chigbu et al., 2019; 
Gyamera et al., 2018). This is likely compounded by rural-to-urban migration, with women often 
arriving in cities without spouses or families, as single heads of household, and without effective 
decision-making influence in the community (FAO, 2002). As a result of this lack of social and 
economic capital, these women often end up joining the 1 in 8 urban dwellers who live in an 
informal settlement, where tenure is especially precarious due to these settlements’ “illegal” 

=== Página 24 ===
47
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
46
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
nature and the constant threat of eviction. Women living in slums without security of tenure also 
often lack legal protection, rendering the situation even more challenging (COHRE, 2008).
Research demonstrates that access to property and security of tenure is one of the most 
important factors in protecting women and sexual and gender minorities from GBV and in 
particular, Intimate Partner Violence (IPV) (Caron, 2013). Land rights around the world often tie 
a woman’s right to property to her relationship with a man, which can place her in a vulnerable 
position for abuse, exploitation, and eviction. For example, a study in Kerala, India found that 
49% of women who did not own property reported physical IPV, compared to only 18% of 
women who owned land, 10% of those who owned a house, and 7% of those who owned both. 
Another study in Kerala found that in cases of IPV, 71% of women who owned property left the 
home, whereas only 19% without property left (Agarwal and Panda, 2007; for more information 
see case study on urban land management in Kerala, India in Chapter 5). Similar trends have 
been observed in South Africa, where women who were able to acquire their own property had 
significantly greater odds of escaping abuse and partners who refuse condoms, allowing them 
to better navigate risks of HIV infection (ICRW, 2007). Overall, when women and sexual and 
gender minorities have security of tenure, they face fewer pressures when choosing a partner 
and have the financial independence to leave abusive or unhealthy relationships (Habitat for 
Humanity, 2016). 
If women and sexual and gender minorities do not have security of tenure, they are not only 
more vulnerable to GBV, but also unable to use land to generate social and economic benefits. 
Research has shown that when women have clearer land tenure, they are more involved in 
household decisions and, in turn, are more likely to prioritize spending on the family to reduce 
poverty (Quisumbing et al., 1999); more likely to favor healthier subsistence crops over cash 
crops (Catacutan et al., 2014); more likely to put funds towards education (Katz and Chamorro, 
2002); and less likely to see high levels of malnutrition among their children (Landesa, 2012). 
Women’s inability to make these decisions can thus have profoundly negative effects on cities 
at large. 
2.3  Gendered Challenges in the Urban Environment
IMPORTANT STATISTICS
•	
Nearly 40% of the world’s economies have at least one legal constraint on 
women’s rights to property (World Bank, 2019)
•	
Only 37 countries out of 161 have specific laws granting women and men 
equal rights in land ownership (World Bank, 2019)
•	
In Kerala, India, reports of intra-marital violence dropped to 7% among 
women who own land and housing compared to 49% of women with neither 
(Agarwal and Panda, 2007)
•	
The odds that a child is severely underweight are reduced by 50% when a 
mother owns land (Allendorf, 2007)
The Bottom Line:
Why Should We Care about  
Gender in Planning and Design?
The preceding section has detailed some of the main mechanisms by which gender inequality 
intersects and interacts with factors in the built environment — from poor street design that 
heightens risk of GBV, to limited mobility that can reduce women’s likelihood of escaping in a 
natural disaster. These have been categorized into six issue areas in order to facilitate both a 
broad and deep understanding of the economic and social costs of poor urban planning and 
design for women, girls, and sexual and gender minorities of all ages and abilities. 
However, when it comes to the everyday lived experiences of people within these groups, 
challenges in areas such as mobility, health, and safety are not experienced in isolation. Rather, 
these challenges accumulate and compound one another, feeding into systemic social and 
economic inequities. If a single mother in an informal settlement doesn’t feel safe walking home 
at night, she may have to work informally from home and only earn enough to afford a house in 
a flood zone, putting her livelihood and family at risk. If a transgender woman is assaulted on the 
bus back from her evening class, she may start to pay extra for a taxi, quit the class, or feel afraid 
to go out in public at all. If a retired woman with a visual impairment misses a health appointment 
because she gets on the wrong train, she might forego healthcare or ask her daughter to skip work 
and drive her to the hospital. If an 11-year-old girl has to fetch water and develops chronic back 
pain, she may be unable to socialize, get to school, safely walk to and from the latrine at night, or 
escape quickly enough when an earthquake hits.  If a mother has to take her children to school, 
work a 6-hour shift on the other side of town, pick up the children, and do the housework, she 
might not be able to attend a planning meeting at the town hall, or squeeze in the time to vote in 
her local election.
These scenarios illustrate how deficiencies in how the urban environment has been designed 
and planned can compound one another to trigger severe economic and social impacts. Such 
deficiencies can be as seemingly innocuous and insignificant as a cracked pavement, a cancelled 
train route, or a broken water tap. But the bottom line is that the economic and social costs of such 
deficiencies are significant. Faced with such challenges, women, girls, and sexual and gender 
minorities of all ages and abilities often:
•	
Struggle to access gainful employment, education and other basic human endowments
•	
Struggle to accumulate wealth and achieve economic independence
•	
Spend more on basic services
•	
Have fewer social freedoms, hindering them from building social networks to cope with risk, 
stress, and shock
•	
Struggle to exercise agency in public decision-making, including decisions that shape the built 
environment
Ultimately, gender biases in the built environment contribute directly to the global systems that 
perpetuate damaging gender roles and oppress women, girls, sexual and gender minorities, and 
those with disabilities. Nonetheless, while we can link many drivers of gender inequality to the built 
environment, we can also understand the built environment, and urban planning and design, as 
key opportunities to promote equity.

=== Página 25 ===
49
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
48
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
The Opportunity: 
What Could a Gender-Inclusive 
City Look Like?
“There is no tool for development more effective than the empowerment of women.”
 — Kofi Annan, former Secretary-General of the United Nations
Cities are incubators of social change and have already driven significant improvements in gender 
equity around the world. By targeting the elements in the built environment that continue to socially 
and economically exclude women, girls, and sexual and gender minorities, we exploit a critical 
opportunity to accelerate gender equity across all sectors of development. 
A city that works well for women, girls, and sexual and gender minorities of all ages and abilities, 
and that therefore supports their economic and social inclusion, is:
1.	 Accessible - Everyone can access the public realm freely, easily, and comfortably to use the 
spaces and services on offer.
2.	 Connected - Everyone can move around the city safely, easily, and affordably to reach key 
opportunities and services. 
3.	 Safe - Everyone is free from real and perceived danger, in public and private. 
4.	 Healthy - Everyone has the opportunity to lead an active lifestyle, free from environmental 
health risks.
5.	 Climate Resilient - Everyone has the tools and social networks to successfully prepare for, 
respond to, and cope with climate disasters.
6.	 Secure - Everyone can obtain or access secure housing and land to live, work, and build 
wealth and agency.
When access, mobility, safety and freedom from violence, health and hygiene, climate resilience, 
and security of tenure are assured for women, girls, and sexual and gender minorities of all ages 
and abilities, they have the same right to the city as straight, able-bodied men: the same freedoms, 
the same opportunities, and the same levels of participation. They are able to access a full range 
of public services, workplaces, schools, and other key amenities whenever they need or want, 
enabling them to combine reproductive and productive roles efficiently and unlock economic 
opportunity. They feel at ease and connected to others in the city, allowing them to stay mentally, 
physically, and emotionally healthy and build social networks to cope with the everyday stresses 
of urban life, as well as the shocks and disasters that can occur. They can build wealth and other 
assets to maintain security and agency for long-term prosperity, and have an equal voice in public 
decisions that affect them. 
With cities home to more women-headed households and more women participating in the formal 
economy than ever, women are “a city’s greatest asset, and contribute heavily to sustainable 
urban development” (UN-HABITAT, 2012) — not to mention the contributions of sexual and gender 
minorities, who make up a significant proportion of the global population. A study by the McKinsey 
Global Institute (2015) shows show that closing the gender gap in labor markets could produce 
as much as $28 trillion – 26% – in annual GDP worldwide by 2025. The full social and economic 
benefits of assuring the right to the city of all women, girls, and sexual and gender minorities would 
be transformative.
Moser (1993) sets out a useful framework for understanding how to address both the 
immediate and longer-term needs of women through development initiatives. This framework 
of “practical” and “strategic” gender needs gives a good sense of what the “bare minimum” 
approach would be to ensure cities work better for women, girls, and sexual and gender 
minorities; and what would “go further” to address the underlying gender imbalances and 
broader social and economic impacts. Both have a critical role to play in addressing gender 
imbalances in the built environment and ensuring a gender-inclusive city. However, given 
how cultural and social contexts differ across regions, countries, and even localities, local 
data and community input must guide project design in order to meet an appropriate and 
culturally-sensitive balance between practical and strategic needs.
PRACTICAL GENDER NEEDS - Practical gender needs are concerned with the 
necessities and inadequacies that women and sexual and gender minorities identify within a 
specific development context. They can be understood as “symptoms” of gender inequality 
— in the case of the built environment, often symptoms such as lack of access, mobility, 
safety, health, climate resilience, or security of tenure. An example of meeting a practical 
gender need would be to promote mixed-use development and co-location of services so 
mothers can access childcare services closer to home, or to design public spaces with 
better lighting to help women and sexual and gender minorities feel safer at night.
Meeting practical gender needs does not challenge the gendered division of labor or the 
subordination of women and sexual and gender minorities; it is more like using a “band-
aid” to alleviate the symptoms. However, addressing practical needs — which have severe 
day-to-day impacts on women, girls, and sexual and gender minorities — is critical and can 
provide a useful “way-in” to addressing deeper strategic needs. 
STRATEGIC GENDER NEEDS - Strategic gender needs are the needs women and 
sexual and gender minorities identify because of their subordinate position in their society. 
They relate to gendered divisions of labor, power, and control, and encompass issues such 
as land rights, equal wages, and bodily autonomy. Meeting strategic gender needs cannot 
be achieved without the full and active participation of women and sexual and gender 
minorities, because strategic gender needs vary so widely by context and require “on-the-
ground” knowledge, and because they directly relate to the need for increased agency in 
decision-making. 
An example of addressing a strategic gender need could be using segregated focus groups 
to encourage transgender women to speak candidly about their safety in public toilets, 
and then co-designing a new sanitation block that the women operate, helping them earn 
income while increasing their visibility in the public realm. Meeting strategic gender needs 
challenges the social and economic subordination of women and sexual and gender 
minorities, promoting their agency and inclusion.
(Source: Moser, 1993, modified)
PRACTICAL VERSUS STRATEGIC NEEDS
2.3  Gendered Challenges in the Urban Environment

=== Página 26 ===
51
51
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design, 2020
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
51

=== Página 27 ===
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
53
52
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
Goals of Gender-Inclusive 
Planning and Design
As Chapter 2 has explored, the built urban environment does not work as well for women, girls, 
and sexual and gender minorities of all ages and abilities as it does for heterosexual, cisgender, 
able-bodied men. This inequity in the built environment — in no small part a result of women 
and sexual and gender minorities being underrepresented in planning and design processes — 
perpetuates wider social and economic exclusions that form the basis of gender inequity. The 
goals of gender-inclusive planning and design, then, are to:
1.	 Actively include and promote the agency of women, girls, and sexual and gender minorities 
of all ages and abilities in planning and design decision-making processes, in order to
2.	 Systemically combat the gendered imbalances in the built environment that prevent these 
groups from enjoying equal access, mobility, safety, health, climate resilience, and security 
of tenure to straight men, in order to
3.	 Create gender-inclusive cities that support the full social and economic inclusion of women, 
girls, and sexual and gender minorities of all ages and abilities, in order to
4.	 Advance gender equity and unlock more inclusive global economic and social development.
The following excerpts from the World Bank Gender Strategy, Gender Tag Guidance Note (draft), 
and Environmental and Social framework (ESF) provide further context for these goals and help 
situate them within the World Bank Group’s mission of ending poverty and achieving prosperity 
for all.
The Environmental and Social Framework (ESF) enables the World Bank and 
borrowers to better manage the environmental and social risks of projects and 
improve development outcomes. The ESF offers broad and systematic coverage 
of environmental and social risks. It makes important advances in areas such as 
transparency, non-discrimination, public participation, and accountability, including 
expanded roles for grievance mechanisms, while bringing the World Bank’s 
environmental and social protections into closer harmony with those of other 
development institutions. Its principal lists examples of vulnerable and disadvantaged 
groups and explicitly requires staff to assist borrowers in considering, mitigating, 
and managing related issues. These include climate change; disability; free, prior 
and informed consent of indigenous peoples; gender; human rights; labor and 
occupational health and safety issues; and land tenure and natural resources. It 
was launched in October 2018 after nearly four years of analysis and engagement 
around the world with governments, development experts, and civil society groups, 
encompassing nearly 8,000 stakeholders in 63 countries.
WORLD BANK GROUP ENVIRONMENTAL 
AND SOCIAL FRAMEWORK
The 2015 World Bank Group Gender Strategy introduced a stronger focus on the frontier areas 
of more and better jobs as well as ownership and control over key financial and physical assets, 
but it also recognized that closing the remaining gender gaps in endowments, enhancing 
voice and agency, and engaging men and boys are critical to reducing poverty and boosting 
shared prosperity (World Bank Group, 2015). The Bank’s strategy builds on the synergies and 
interconnectedness among these domains. For example, although human endowments such 
as health and education are important, they also contribute to women’s ability to take advantage 
of economic opportunities, and their capacity to exercise voice and agency. Improvements 
in infrastructure (water and sanitation, transport, and energy) increase the time available for 
women to participate in paid employment and enable better access to markets and health 
and education services. Gender-based violence is a constraint to women’s voice and agency, 
but it also affects economic opportunity — due to work absenteeism — as well as mental and 
physical health.
GENDER TAG
The World Bank Group introduced the “Gender Tag”, a corporate monitoring tool, to track 
operations that commit to narrowing key gender gaps by following a systematic logical chain 
of (i) carrying out a gender analysis and (ii) identifying the key project actions and indicators 
that will address identified gaps. The aim is to move beyond checking the box and do-no-harm 
approaches of the past, and to leverage project entry points to make a transformational impact 
on gender gaps. This is done by ensuring an indicator on gender is related to the project 
development objective; is linked to proposed actions to close a gender gap in the sector; and 
is included within the project results framework. In this way, the project moves from advocacy 
to specific action and measurable results. 
For further resources on the gender tag, please see Chapter 6. Chapter 4.1 showcases 
indicators that are helpful for designing and monitoring progress in urban planning projects 
and that fulfill the gender tag criteria for monitoring and evaluation. The following excerpts are 
from the Good Practice Note for the Gender Tag (November 2019).
ANALYSIS
•	
Is there an evidence-substantiated analysis of gender gaps identified in the Systematic 
Country Diagnostics (SCD), Country Partnership Frameworks (CPF) or elsewhere relevant 
to the Project? 
All country-specific gender assessments and regional gender action plans (RGAPs) 
identify relevant gaps under Gender Strategy pillars that could be addressed by operations 
in a country portfolio. In addition, SCDs and CPFs can point teams to the most salient 
gaps to be addressed in a country context, while Global Practice (GP) Follow-up Notes 
articulate the gaps relevant to key sector operations (Box 3). Analysis in the Project 
Appraisal Document (PAD) should refer to these and/or other documents to identify 
relevant gaps in human endowments, jobs, assets (such as land, finance, technology), 
and voice/agency that can be addressed within the scope of the project. 
GENDER-INCLUSIVE PLANNING AND DESIGN AND THE 
WORLD BANK GROUP GENDER STRATEGY
3.1  Goals of Gender-Inclusive Planning and Design

=== Página 28 ===
55
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
54
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
GENDER-INCLUSIVE PLANNING AND DESIGN AND THE 
WORLD BANK GROUP GENDER STRATEGY
ACTIONS
•	
Does the project propose specific actions to address the gender gaps identified in the 
analysis?
The team should consider what actions during project preparation and implementation will 
address the identified gender gaps that are relevant to the project. Actions should be reflected 
in the project document and described in the relevant components. Mitigation actions are not 
sufficient to fulfill the Tag criteria. 
Actions need to close gaps that directly address the four pillars of the Gender Strategy and 
are relevant to project objectives. Gender does not mean only rectifying female disadvantage; 
there can be a gap to the disadvantage of males, such as higher-than-female school drop-
out rates or male morbidity (see Figures 2a and 2b for an example). Beyond disadvantage, 
it is also important to note that projects should consider men’s roles as agents of change to 
improve outcomes for gender equality – for instance, in improving household nutrition and 
health outcomes, and in GBV prevention. 
MONITORING AND EVALUATION
•	
Are there indicators to monitor how the planned actions will be tracked in terms of closing 
the identified gaps?
Indicators should be linked to the project’s Project Development Objective (PDO) or intermediate 
outcomes. The Results Framework (RF) can include quantitative indicators based on sex-
disaggregated statistical data from surveys or administrative records (e.g., education attainment 
rates for boys compared to girls). Indicators may be at the process, output or outcome levels, 
as appropriate, and baseline data should be collected in order to set targets for the indicators. If 
baseline data are not available, the RF should provide an alternative way to track progress (e.g., 
starting from baseline of N/A or “0,” the indicator could measure incremental changes/values 
throughout project implementation to demonstrate progress). 
	
As good practice, all person-level indicators (e.g., youth employment rates, farmers accessing 
new technology, customers with new bank accounts, etc.) should be sex-disaggregated, so 
that potential differential outcomes can be tracked. However, sex-disaggregated indicators 
alone are not sufficient for the Tag; there should be explicit targets to measure improvement in 
the identified gap. Nor is the standard indicator “number/percentage of female beneficiaries” 
sufficient for the Tag, as it does not convey whether a gap has been closed or whether there is 
a differential effect for males and females. Citizen engagement indicators are also not sufficient 
to get the Tag, as standard practice should be to consult females and males. Survey questions 
about satisfaction are rarely reliable or specific enough to gauge sustainable improvement 
of a gender gap. For DPOs, indicators should be aligned with prior actions that government 
takes before disbursement (see Section IV). The RF should clearly define the methodology by 
describing exactly how progress toward closing gaps will be measured. 
3.1  Goals of Gender-Inclusive Planning and Design
Key Commitments for Gender-
Inclusive Planning and Design
Gender-inclusive urban planning and design are a direct answer to historical and systemic 
failings in urban planning and design. These include:
•	
The lack of representation and agency of women, girls, and sexual and gender minorities of 
all ages and abilities in decisions that shape the built environment
•	
The way in which urban planning and design processes are often carried out in a 
disconnected, isolated manner that fails to acknowledge systemic injustices and barriers
•	
The tendency for traditional planning and design processes to assume, rather than ask, and 
consult, rather than collaborate
•	
The attitude that “gender” simply means “women” as an add-on, rather than an integral part 
of project design
In order to fulfill the ultimate goal of creating gender-inclusive cities that advance gender equity, 
designers and planners undoubtedly need to adopt a non-traditional approach. The following 
is a set of core commitments that should serve as a “north star” for project teams from design 
through to evaluation, helping them fully prepare for and execute a gender-inclusive process. 
Far from vague or disconnected from the on-the-ground reality, these commitments are the 
starting point for the practical Process, Plan, and Project Guidelines detailed in Chapter 4 and 
serve as a basis — perhaps even a checklist — for effective, gender-inclusive project design.
To achieve Gender-Inclusive Planning and Design, a project team must commit to:
A PARTICIPATORY PROCESS
Gender inclusion means actively bringing the voices of women, girls, and sexual and gender 
minorities into critical decision-making, ensuring their input and agency is of as high quantity and 
quality as men’s. Project leads must respect and understand that community knowledge and 
experience are as important in meeting gender needs as technical expertise and theory. Projects 
are driven by locally-identified priorities, whereby the priorities of women, girls, and sexual and 
gender minorities are of equal import to those of heterosexual, cisgender men. Women, girls, 
and sexual and gender minority beneficiaries must be involved as upstream as possible in the 
project design, and are engaged in Monitoring, Evaluation, Accountability, and Learning (MEAL), 
co-defining research questions and facilitating gender-disaggregated data collection.
AN INTEGRATED APPROACH 
"Gender-inclusive urban planning and design" incorporate cross-sectoral strategies to address 
gender needs holistically, based on the understanding that gender inequity is a cross-cutting 
issue that can only be addressed by working across different sectors, typologies, practices, and 
fields of expertise. In addition to this horizontal, cross-sectoral integration, gender inclusion must 
be vertically integrated — linking “on-the-ground” community expertise with government-level 
policy and action — to ensure sustainable impact as well as promoting vertical communication 
and collaboration on future projects. Community and government project partners should be 
brought together to co-define project goals and methodologies; carry out project activities; and 
evaluate project success.

=== Página 29 ===
56
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
THE PRINCIPLES OF UNIVERSAL DESIGN
Gender-inclusive projects acknowledge how multiple disadvantages intersect and compound 
with each other. As such, gender-inclusive planners and designers must adopt the principles of 
Universal Design, which promotes a built environment that meets the needs of all people who 
wish to use it, regardless of their age, ability, size, ethnicity, race, income, class, sexuality, and 
gender identity. Centering in particular the diversity of needs that comes with differences in 
ability, Universal Design promotes equitable use, flexibility of use, simplicity and intuitiveness 
of use, accessibility of information, minimization of hazards, minimization of physical effort, 
and appropriateness of size and space for approach and use (NC State, 1997). By centering 
diversity throughout the design process, Universal Design promotes a built environment that 
works well for everyone. 
KNOWLEDGE-BUILDING
To help the World Bank and other actors continue learning what works for gender equity and 
build strategically on that knowledge, gender-inclusive urban planning and design must be 
properly evaluated with rigorous Monitoring, Evaluation, Accountability, and Learning (MEAL) 
processes based on relevant gender-disaggregated indicators. This data should be gathered in 
collaboration with women and sexual and gender minority beneficiaries, so that their experiences 
shape the MEAL framework, and so that they partake in learning and are subsequently able 
to advocate for their interests based on the knowledge that is generated. Learning must be 
proactively disseminated to internal and external audiences, including cities and communities, 
in the interest of refining and democratizing global strategies for gender equity.
POWER-BUILDING
Gender-inclusive planning and design offer an important opportunity to build the capacity, 
know-how, and political capital of women and sexual and gender minorities so that they 
may collaborate more effectively with government actors and participate in further decision-
making processes to shape the built environment. Rather than consulting women and sexual 
and gender minorities in discrete engagements that maintain them at “arms length” from key 
decision-making processes, projects should actively build the capacity of women and sexual 
and gender minorities to join, influence, and even lead such processes. This may take the form 
of capacity-building workshops and trainings, or the formation of leadership committees.
INVESTMENT
Gender-inclusive planning and design are more than a series of adjustments or add-ons to 
the design and implementation process. They require a fundamental re-alignment of mindsets 
and resources to achieve results. Simply having female beneficiaries in the catchment area is 
not enough: additional time, expertise, and resources are essential to intentionally establishing 
gender principles and following through on goals in procurement and delivery of projects. Project 
teams developing work packages must incorporate these additional time and cost requirements 
from the very beginning of project scoping. Additionally, it is critical to incorporate universal 
accessibility into budgets in order to meet the needs of women, girls, and sexual and gender 
minorities of all abilities. It has been shown that making buildings accessible adds less than 1% 
to construction costs (UN-OHCHR, 2007).
3.2  Key Commitments for Gender-Inclusive Planning and Design
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
57
PRINCIPLES OF GENDER-INCLUSIVE 
PLANNING AND DESIGN 
GENDER-INCLUSIVE PLANNING AND DESIGN ARE...
 
Participatory: actively including the voices of women, girls, and sexual and gender 
minorities .
 
Integrated: adopting a holistic, cross-cutting approach that centers gender throughout 
and promotes citizen-city relationship building.
 
Universal: meeting the needs of women, girls, and sexual and gender minorities of all 
ages and abilities.
 
Knowledge-building: seeking out and sharing robust, meaningful new data on gender 
equity.
 
Power-building: growing the capacity and influence of under-represented groups in key 
decisions.
 
Invested-in: committing the necessary finances and expertise to follow through on 
intentional gender equity goals.
 
GENDER-INCLUSIVE PLANNING AND DESIGN ARE NOT...
 
Prescriptive: designing and planning for women, girls, and sexual and gender minorities 
instead of with them.
 
An add-on: considering women separately from other beneficiaries and project goals; 
failing to connect the dots or the actors involved.
 
Exclusive: being concerned with the needs of able-bodied women or female persons 
alone.
Uninformative: operating in a vacuum without engaging with and contributing to broader 
knowledge on gender.
Disempowering: repeating or reinforcing historical imbalances in representation and 
agency.
 
Uninvested-in: assuming gender goals are achieved if women are among beneficiaries 
without investing the required time and resources to follow through.
3.2  Key Commitments for Gender-Inclusive Planning and Design

=== Página 30 ===
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
59

=== Página 31 ===
61
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
Introduction to 
the Guidelines
This chapter gives clear and actionable recommendations for implementing gender-inclusive 
urban plans and built urban design and infrastructure projects. These recommendations 
provide best-practice approaches in the planning, design, and implementation of built work, 
and show how to create a comprehensive process that is inclusive of, and tailored towards, 
women, girls, and sexual and gender minorities of all ages and abilities. 
The intention of this chapter is to provide a set of flexible and open tools that can be used 
by World Bank staff, partners, and contractors leading project consultation processes. 
As such, while these guidelines have been informed by good practices and diverse case 
studies, each recommendation must be evaluated and adapted according to the physical, 
cultural, and regulatory context of the project and place in question.
The guidelines are broken up into three categories: 
1.	 Process Guidelines: essential steps and activities for gender-inclusive processes in 
urban planning and design 
2.	 Planning Guidelines: gender-inclusive strategies for key urban plan typologies
3.	 Project Guidelines: gender-inclusive design and implementation strategies for key 
built project types
The aim of this breakdown is to provide guidance on both “process” and “product”. The 
Process Guidelines give guidance on gender-inclusive and context-specific processes and 
activities that could be applied throughout the course of multiple plan and project types. The 
Planning and Project Guidelines provide practical guidance for design and implementation 
of gender-inclusive spaces, infrastructure, and urban planning processes. The Process 
Guidelines, and the Planning and Project Guidelines, are described in more detail in the 
following sections.

=== Página 32 ===
62
63
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
Process Guidelines 
and Activities
While no two projects or urban plans are the same, some overarching recommendations can 
be made about relevant strategies and activities that will deepen engagement, emphasize 
gender equity, and bring gender analyses into urban planning and design in a meaningful 
way. The diagram to the right lays out this pathway, which was formulated based on global 
good practices, design experience and expertise, and from the results of successful 
participatory processes. 
The process overview diagram is based around the phases in a project — from conception 
through implementation — that the World Bank and its partners would usually be engaged 
in. 
The four main steps are:
•	
STEP 1: Creating a Baseline Foundation by establishing Gender Principles
•	
STEP 2: Establishing a Process Framework that embraces Monitoring,Evaluation, 
Accountability, and Learning (MEAL)
•	
STEP 3: Designing a Participation Framework that creates buy-in, gathers data, and 
engages beneficiaries in design
•	
STEP 4: Creating an Application Framework for Implementation
While not necessarily or strictly chronological, these steps can be mapped onto most typical 
planning and design processes as a flexible template. In the following section, each strategy 
and activity is further described to provide more detailed guidance on how to incorporate 
gender inclusion into project processes.
Note: 
STEP 3: Participation Framework contains instructions for seven step-by-step activities that 
can be implemented to garner buy-in, gather data, and engage women, girls, and sexual 
and gender minorities in design. Each activity is described in detail, with guidance on key 
objectives and any materials needed. Suggestions on which of these seven activities will 
be most relevant or useful for each plan and project type are given in Chapter 4.2. It is 
important to note that each of these strategies and activities must be adapted to the project 
type, cultural context, and specifics of the community being served.
Participatory process framework 
for urban planning and design
1
2
PROCESS FRAMEWORK
4
	
STRATEGIES
	
STRATEGIES
PARTICIPATION FRAMEWORK
2
         STRATEGIES
	
STRATEGIES
	
TOOLS AND ACTIVITIES
APPLICATION FRAMEWORK
1
2
   BASELINE FOUNDATION
4
GENDER 
PRINCIPLES
ADVISORY 
GROUP
MONITORING, EVALUATION, 
ACCOUNTABILITY AND LEARNING
GENDER- 
DISAGGREGATED 
DATA
PROPORTIONATE 
REPRESENTATION
GENDER 
SEGREGATED   
FORUM
3
CODE REVIEW
FACILITATION 
BY TARGET 
GROUPS
COMMUNITY 
MOBILIZATION
PARTICIPATORY    
DATA COLLECTION
CHALLENGE 
AND SOLUTION
DAY IN THE 
LIFE
WALK AUDIT
STEP UP
STAR DIAGRAM
DESIGN YOUR         
OWN ___
CONTRACTING 
OBJECTIVES
IMPLEMENTATION
MICROFINANCE
GENDER-    
RESPONSIVE 
BUDGETING
A
B
C
B
A
C
D
E
A
B
C
D
I
A
F
E
G
H
J
B
C
GENDER TAGGING
PUBLIC 
SPACE 
CHECKLIST
K
D
PARTICIPATORY
PLANNING AND DESIGN

=== Página 33 ===
1
1
64
65
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
4.1  Process Guidelines and Activities
4.1  Process Guidelines and Activities
BASELINE FOUNDATION
GENDER PRINCIPLES
Establish gender principles or commitments that promote the right to the city 
for women, girls, and sexual and gender minorities of all ages and abilities in 
the pre-plan and pre-project phase. At this stage of the process, it’s important 
to intentionally name these principles to allow for clarity among the project 
team. These principles can serve as a guide throughout the project to ensure 
gender inclusion remains central to the effort, and will inform the entire process 
— from the analysis of planning tasks and formulation of project goals, to 
the design and implementation of the project. The commitments detailed in 
Chapter 3 of this handbook provide a valuable starting point for formulating 
gender principles. In particular, a clear commitment to meaningful, authentic, 
and equitable participation, with the attitudes and policies to support decision-
making that happens with women and sexual and gender minorities instead 
of for them, is essential. Including these principles from the start is also much 
more efficient, as it is more costly and difficult to retrofit a project to meet these 
needs after construction or implementation is complete. 
ADVISORY GROUP
Establish an advisory group of local residents and gender experts — and, 
where appropriate, representatives of sexual and gender minorities and 
people with disabilities — made up of at least 50% women to provide project 
oversight and ensure all activities and outcomes are gender-inclusive and 
equitable. This nimble set of stakeholders can vet ideas, offer guidance, and 
provide expert academic and community knowledge to ensure the project is 
context-sensitive and grounded in lived experience. 
Below is a list of potential meeting activities for the advisory group:
•	
Project Kick-Off: Walk the group through the goals, scope, and intended 
outcomes of the project 
•	
Monitoring and Evaluation Framework Development: Vet indicators, 
survey questions, and other data collection tools with the group
•	
Participatory Engagement Planning: Brainstorm good practices and 
context-specific activities that can be used to bring 	
residents into 
the project development process
•	
Sharing Back: Present findings and evaluation results to the group, 
and ask members to brainstorm next steps for project adjustments and 
sharing lessons learned with a larger audience
1
A
B
ADDRESSING GENDER GAPS IN BUDGETING
Design a project budget that intentionally and equitably allocates resources 
between all genders to address issues of inequity in the built environment. 
Gender budgeting is a “gender-based assessment of budgets incorporating 
a gender perspective at all levels of the budgetary process and restructuring 
revenues and expenditures in order to promote gender equality” (European 
Institute for Gender Equality, 2017). The purpose of this strategy is to 
achieve accountability and transparency in budget planning, and to improve 
representation of all genders in the budgeting process. This approach to 
budgeting can be used at multiple scales of project or planning processes. 
Gender-equitable distribution of resources requires the analysis of budgets 
through a gender lens. This may include, for example:
•	
Assessment of adequacy of budget allocations for implementation of the 
project according to gender-inclusive principles
•	
Analysis of gender-disaggregated public expenditure
•	
Income analysis to understand potential gendered impacts (e.g. 
disproportionate impacts of changes to user fees on women and sexual 
and gender minorities)
•	
Estimation of personnel costs broken down by women and men
In addition to analyzing budgets to understand the links to overall gender 
goals, the following must be in place: 
•	
Ability to restructure budgets and policies to align with a more gender-
inclusive framework
•	
Monitoring and evaluation of the budgeting process and outcomes via 
gender-disaggregated data
•	
Participation of women and sexual and gender minorities (as appropriate) 
in the process through participatory budgeting
GENDER TAGGING
Track all projects through the World Bank Gender Tagging system to better 
understand project outcomes and successes, and to systematically build 
knowledge. This system was developed by the Bank in order to identify 
projects that have clear actions related to the four pillars of the Gender 
Strategy. Projects are “tagged” if they do all of the following:
•	
Identify gaps relevant to the four pillars of the WBG Gender Strategy
•	
Aim to address these gaps through specific actions supported by the 
project
C
D

=== Página 34 ===
66
67
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
4.1  Process Guidelines and Activities
4.1  Process Guidelines and Activities
•	
Link the actions to indicators in the project’s results framework
The aim of this system is to draw strong links between gender analysis, 
actions, and monitoring and evaluation (see the box on the World Bank’s 
Gender Strategy in Chapter 3 for more detail).
PROCESS FRAMEWORK
MONITORING, EVALUATION, 
ACCOUNTABILITY AND LEARNING
Create a long-term Monitoring, Evaluation, Accountability, and Learning 
(MEAL) framework that guides the design, implementation, and adaptive 
management of a project and establishes targets for a project’s success at the 
beginning of the planning process — not during the implementation stage. 
This framework will allow for evaluation of both successes and failures, as 
well as the opportunity to adapt a project during or following implementation 
to improve on delivered outcomes, based on resident feedback and relevant 
gender-disaggregated data. A set of core MEAL indicators related to gender 
inclusion must be developed in order to measure success, with a management 
plan for how to improve project performance if it is found that targets are not 
being met. These indicators can be based on the issue areas in Chapter 2 that 
are most relevant to a particular project, such as access or safety and freedom 
from violence (see the box at the end of STEP 2 for more detail and examples 
of indicators used in gender-tagged World Bank projects). Resources needed 
to ensure regular reflection and periodic evaluation throughout the lifetime of 
the project and adaptive management techniques should be factored into the 
overall budget. Data for this evaluation should be sourced from third parties, 
public data, and existing data.
GENDER-DISAGGREGATED DATA
Collecting gender-disaggregated data is the first step toward gender-inclusive 
development. 
Gender-disaggregated data is data that can be broken down by gender groups 
— men, women, and gender minorities — to allow for analysis of the different 
challenges they face. Gender-disaggregated quantitative and qualitative data 
should be collected at the start of any planning or development process to 
expose current gender-related inequalities, inform data-driven solutions, and 
enable the measurement of project success over time. It is worth investigating 
if any previous gender-disaggregated data has been collected that is relevant 
to the project. Once the project has been defined, a permanent MEAL 
framework should be set in place to include data collection at the baseline (pre-
implementation and design), midway through design, and on a recurring basis, 
post-implementation, to measure improvements. 
2
A
B
As part of baseline data collection, conduct an audit of the legal, social, and 
economic status of women and sexual and gender minorities, investigating 
land tenure laws, financing regulations, and cultural norms in order to anticipate 
challenges these groups might face in accessing a project once it is completed. 
While gender-disaggregated data is not sufficient for the gender tag, it must 
be collected regardless of whether the plan or project is intended to address 
gender inequities in order to track whether there are inadvertent or unintentional 
adverse impacts on women and sexual and gender minorities.
PROPORTIONATE REPRESENTATION
Ensure that the gender makeup of the project stakeholder participant group 
is proportionally representative of the larger population. Analyze population 
data disaggregrated by sex and/or gender to determine the sample size and 
appropriate demographic proportions for the participants within the sample size. 
If demographic data does not exist, strive for a 50/50 representation of men and 
women at a minimum. Ensure that the participants also represent the different 
ages, abilities, sexual orientation, gender identities, and ethnic groups of the 
larger population as much as possible. This is important because it prevents 
opinions, decisions, and solutions from being inaccurate reflections of the larger 
population, and thus ineffective and inequitable. Use a multi-pronged approach 
to engage hard-to-reach populations in planning and design, such as those 
who have limited mobility, caregivers, or individuals with non-traditional working 
hours. These populations are often predominantly women. 
Below is a list of tactics to ensure proportionate representation is achieved:
•	
Offer a high number of meetings
•	
Conduct mobile meetings and engagement activities
•	
Vary the location and timing of engagement activities
•	
Provide monetary incentives
•	
Provide childcare, food, and translation services at all engagements
GENDER-SEGREGATED FORUM
Provide gender-segregated forums where women, girls, and sexual and gender 
minorities can speak freely on gender-related challenges and solutions. Gender-
segregated forums create a safe space for people to comfortably discuss their 
unique lived experiences and needs — which may be the result of planning and 
design failures — or safety concerns in public space and the home. Providing 
a safe space for women, girls, and sexual and gender minorities to participate 
ensures that practitioners and decision-makers have the most candid and 
accurate information possible to develop effective solutions.
C
D

=== Página 35 ===
1
69
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
68
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
4.1  Process Guidelines and Activities
EXAMPLE INDICATORS FROM WORLD 
BANK FY17-19 GENDER TAGGED 
Below is a list of example indicators drawn directly from projects in the World Bank FY17-19 
portfolio that have been gender-tagged. Going beyond the basic measure of “number of female 
beneficiaries”, they demonstrate how the issue areas discussed in Chapter 2 can provide a useful 
framework for choosing specific project outcomes to measure (see Chapter 4.2 to understand 
which issue areas are “key” to different plan and project typologies, and should therefore be the 
focus of Monitoring, evaluation, Access and Learning (MEAL)). The indicators also show how 
other World Bank project teams are monitoring representation and inclusion of women in project 
decision-making processes, and assessing deeper economic and social impacts.
Often, the most useful indicators are those that reveal (i) changes in attitudes or behavior and (ii) 
levels of beneficiary/participant satisfaction with the project. These are much more meaningful 
than simply measuring the number of people “benefitting from” a project — which does not make 
it clear whose perspective regarding project “benefits” is being counted. For further guidance 
on how to develop quality indicators that are relevant, acceptable, credible, easy, and robust 
"RACER", see DEVCO (2016).
The below indicators can be directly applied to other projects, or adapted to better suit the 
particular context in which a project is taking place. Note, however, that none of the indicators 
measure outcomes for sexual and gender minorities or people with disabilities, which are 
equally important. In many cases, “of which women” can be supplemented with “of which sexual 
or gender minorities” and “of which people with disabilities”.
ACCESS
•	
Number of people with improved access to basic services in disadvantaged neighborhoods 
(of which women) 
•	
Percentage of users satisfied with quality of basic infrastructure constructed under the 
project (of which women)
•	
Percentage of surveyed project beneficiaries who rate municipal services satisfactory or 
better (of which women)
•	
Increase in number of visitors to improved public spaces (of which women)
•	
Increase in number of merchants or vendors in improved public spaces (of which women)
•	
Percentage of users satisfied with new or improved public spaces (of which women)
•	
Percentage users satisfied with childcare services provided (of which women)
 
MOBILITY
•	
Percentage of user satisfaction with new or improved roads under project (of which women)
•	
Number of people with access to all-season roads within a 500 meter range (of which 
women)
4.1  Process Guidelines and Activities
It is useful to create multiple opportunities for gender-segregated forums 
throughout any planning or design process. Below is a list of engagements 
that particularly benefit from gender segregation:
•	
Data collection activities such as walk audits or safety mapping 
•	
Workshops or group discussions on challenges and solutions
•	
Focus groups
•	
Evaluation committees
CODE REVIEW
Review all existing and relevant building codes, design guidelines, and 
policies to understand how they may promote or hinder the creation of 
gender-inclusive projects and plans. Many building codes, zoning laws, 
and other regulatory mechanisms have been created, directly or indirectly, 
with able-bodied men as their main authors and intended constituents. In 
order to implement new projects that meet gender goals, a systematic 
review and evaluation of all relevant regulations must be conducted in 
order to understand their effects on different users and groups. Using a 
gender lens to evaluate existing standards can be a mechanism and first 
step for suggesting, amending, testing, and instituting new, more equitable 
building codes. This is a process that was undertaken, for example, by 
planners in Vienna as they looked to create gender-inclusive guidelines 
for the city’s municipal planning bodies.
E

=== Página 36 ===
70
71
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
 SAFETY AND FREEDOM FROM VIOLENCE
•	
Percentage of residents showing lower tolerance towards gender-based violence
•	
Percentage of participating Urban Local Bodies with active anti-sexual harassment 
complaint committees
•	
Percentage of women who report feeling safe in public spaces in the selected neighborhood 
locations
•	
Percentage of women who feel insecure in the neighborhood
 
HEALTH AND HYGIENE
•	
Number of people with access to improved water sources (of which women)
•	
Number of people with access to improved sanitation (of which women)
•	
Number of people with access to regular solid waste collection (of which women)
•	
Number of people provided with improved housing (of which women)
•	
Number of female-headed households with improved living conditions in precarious urban 
settlements
CLIMATE RESILIENCE
•	
Number of people with access to improved drainage (of which women)
•	
Number of people benefitting from improved flood protection (of which women)
•	
Percentage of beneficiaries satisfied with improved and maintained drainage (of which 
women)
•	
Number of people with access to multipurpose disaster shelters as a result of project (of 
which women)
•	
Number of people living in flood-risk areas who are covered by a shelter (of which women)
•	
Percentage of user satisfaction of weather information (of which women)
•	
Number of female-headed households with improved living conditions in precarious urban 
settlements
•	
Number of Disaster Risk Management committees with 50% female committee members
 
4.1  Process Guidelines and Activities
SECURITY OF TENURE
•	
Number of land parcels with use/ownership rights for women recorded as a result of project
•	
Number of housing subsidies allocated to female-headed households
•	
Number of households receiving legal documents through the project (of which benefitting 
women or couples)
•	
Number of people with use or ownership rights recorded as a result of the project (of which 
women)
•	
Registered land transactions (of which by women)
•	
Number of titles registered (of which under women’s names)
REPRESENTATION AND INCLUSION IN PROJECT DECISIONS
•	
Number of participants in consultation activities during project implementation (of which 
women)
•	
Number of participants in community meetings (of which women)
•	
Number of citizen forums that meet target percentage of women attendees
•	
Percentage of beneficiaries that feel project investments reflect their needs (of which women)
•	
Percentage of women who consider that their views have been taken into account in project 
design
•	
Percentage of registered grievances appropriately resolved within two weeks (of which 
submitted by women)
•	
Percentage of project-financed capital expenditure on infrastructure and services which 
directly address constraints and needs identified by women
•	
Number of functional Neighborhood Development Committees where elected positions are 
occupied by target percentage of women
•	
Percentage of women participating in/leading management committees for project
•	
Number of training workshops carried out on construction good practices; workers safety 
and security; local and culturally adequate design; and/or participatory planning, especially 
towards women
•	
Number of Civil Society Organizations trained in gender equality, land rights and Monitoring 
and Evaluation 
•	
Number of participating cities that have conducted a gender-based assessment of access 
to municipal services
4.1  Process Guidelines and Activities

=== Página 37 ===
73
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
72
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
 
ECONOMIC INCLUSION
•	
Number of workdays/jobs generated (of which for women)
•	
Number of locally-hired jobs (of which women)
•	
Number of community-led enterprises that improve economic livelihood (of which women-
led)
•	
Land sector professionals trained by the project (of which women)
•	
Percentage of women working at project construction sites
•	
Increase in number of merchants or vendors in improved public spaces (of which women)
•	
Number of micro-projects for women’s organizations financed
•	
Number of beneficiaries of skills development training provided by the project (of which 
women)
•	
Number of people receiving business start-up advisory services (of which women)
•	
Number of people benefiting from line of credit (of which women)
•	
Number of workshops on gender issues in the workplace
SOCIAL INCLUSION
•	
Percentage of young males and females who report being actively engaged in community 
activities
•	
Community-led initiatives supported by project (of which women-led)
•	
Average percentage difference in the amount of time spent by local women as compared to 
local men on caring for children aged 3-72 months
 Source: World Bank Standard Reports — Urban/Gender tagged
4.1  Process Guidelines and Activities
4.1  Process Guidelines and Activities
PARTICIPATION 
FRAMEWORK
PARTICIPATORY PLANNING AND DESIGN
Engage women, girls, and sexual and gender minorities of all ages and abilities 
in the planning and design process, not just as stakeholders, but as true partners 
with shared decision-making power. This implies a process where women, girls, 
and sexual and gender minorities are actively co-designing plans and projects 
alongside the project team, resulting in solutions that meets their needs and 
priorities. This promotes greater impact, equity, sustainability, and ownership 
among project beneficiaries, thereby fostering long-term community stewardship 
of the project outputs. Women, girls, and sexual and gender minorities should be 
involved in this capacity from the beginning of the project through implementation 
to have the most impact.
FACILITATION BY TARGET GROUPS
Select women and sexual and gender minorities of different ages and abilities 
— where appropriate — to facilitate participatory planning and design processes 
and activities. This helps beneficiaries who are women, girls, or sexual and 
gender minorities feel more comfortable to speak freely and engage deeply in 
the process. Comfort is critical to unearthing the unique challenges and needs of 
women, girls, and sexual and gender minorities, and subsequently co-designing 
effective solutions. Ideally, facilitators should be hired from the community in 
which the work is taking place, so that women, girls, and sexual and gender 
minorities can relate to the facilitator on multiple levels and further deepen their 
engagement with the process. 
Below is a list of questions to consider when hiring facilitation staff:
•	
Does the facilitation staff include women or sexual and gender minorities of 
different ages and abilities?
•	
Would participating women, girls, and sexual and gender minorities feel 
comfortable and safe sharing personal or sensitive information with the 
facilitation staff?
•	
Is the facilitation staff effective at ensuring there is robust input from women, 
girls, and sexual and gender minorities during meetings, data collection or 
other engagement activities?
COMMUNITY MOBILIZATION
Hire resident leaders to help mobilize the larger community to be involved in the 
planning and design process. Local residents have the best understanding of their 
communities and are well-equipped to communicate the relevance of a project 
to the daily lives of residents. This will not only improve transparency and build 
trust with the community, but also ensure that all mobilization and engagement 
3
A
B
C

=== Página 38 ===
75
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
74
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
4.1  Process Guidelines and Activities
4.1  Process Guidelines and Activities
Men can play an active role in reducing gender gaps in the urban planning and design 
process. Given the power imbalances that benefit boys and men at the decision-making 
level, they can be agents of change by enabling women’s agency and lifting limitations on 
meaningful participation of women, girls, and sexual and gender minorities. Evidence from 
recent studies in the health sector demonstrates that gender transformative interventions, 
which seek to change men’s conceptualization of gender norms, can be effective in reducing 
violence perpetration and changing attitudes and behaviors (World Health Organization, 
2007). WHO’s Program H is an intervention for young men that aims to increase their gender 
equitable attitudes, healthy sexual behaviors, and decrease violent behaviors (Pulerwitz et 
al. 2010; Verma et al. 2006).
General lack of agency and representation for women and sexual and gender minorities 
in urban planning and design calls for more programming targeting men and training them 
to be allies in transforming gender norms and changing attitudes towards gender equality.
ENGAGING MEN AND BOYS IN ADVANCING 
GENDER-INCLUSIVE URBAN PLANNING AND DESIGN 
methods are in line with the environmental and cultural context of the community. 
For example, the community mobilizer may have a better understanding of 
neighborhood safety after dark and can advise on whether evening meetings 
would be a practical form of engagement, particularly for women, girls, and 
sexual and gender minorities to attend. 
Below is a list of good practices when hiring and training community mobilizers:
•	
Hire a diverse group of mobilizers including, women, men, sexual and gender 
minorities, people with disabilities, teens, older adults, and people with 
children
•	
Ensure that mobilizers are able to speak the language(s) commonly spoken 
in the community
•	
Co-develop talking points with mobilizers so they can accurately portray the 
project 
•	
Set targets for the number of participants that are proportionate to the 
demographics of the community, for example if the community is 60% female, 
strive for a 60% female participant pool
PARTICIPATORY DATA COLLECTION
Implement a participatory research design and data collection process to yield the 
most accurate qualitative and quantitative gender-disaggregated data. Because 
residents have the most in-depth understanding of the challenges faced in their 
communities, they can support a deeper and more strategic research process. 
Involving women and other residents in every step of the research process helps 
break down barriers and build trust and transparency between the data collectors 
and the wider community that will participate in the research. Participants may 
feel more comfortable sharing sensitive information to someone who intimately 
understands their neighborhood.
D

=== Página 39 ===
76
77
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
PROMOTING BUY-IN
3E  Step Up
The facilitators read different scenarios (described below) out loud. In the different 
scenarios, each participant thinks about how their profile would feel in that particular 
scenario, and either takes a step forward if they would feel comfortable, or a step 
backwards if they would  feel uncomfortable. The participants continue to step 
forwards or backwards, without returning to their original position, until all scenarios 
have been read aloud.
The facilitator says "you are":
10 
min
OBJECTIVE: Create a shared understanding of why gender perspectives are being addressed 
in urban planning and design. Note: this activity can be used in mixed-gender or single gender 
groups.
MATERIALS: Profiles, nametags, masking tape, pens
Give each participant a nametag with a profile on it. Ask participants to begin the 
exercise by standing in a horizontal line marked on the floor with adhesive tape. Ask 
participants to read their name tags silently but to not display them.
Below is a list of potential profiles that facilitators can write on the nametags in 
advance of the meeting, as relevant and appropriate:
•	
Mother, female, 30 years old, 
accompanied by baby
•	
Father, male, 30 years old, 
accompanied by baby
•	
Grandmother, female, 64, traveling 
alone
•	
Grandfather, male, 64, traveling 
alone
•	
High school student, female, 17, 
traveling alone
•	
High school student, male, 17, 
traveling alone
•	
High school student, transgender 
female-to-male, 17, traveling alone
•	
Police officer, female, 36, traveling 
alone
•	
Police officer, male, 36, traveling 
alone
•	
Recent immigrant, female, 27, 
traveling alone
•	
Recent immigrant, male, 27, 
traveling alone
•	
Woman in a wheelchair, 32, 
traveling alone
•	
Young woman, 21, accompanied by 
her boyfriend
•	
Young woman, 21, accompanied by 
her girlfriend
•	
Young man, 21, accompanied by his 
boyfriend
•	
Transgender woman, 25, 
accompanied by a friend
•	
School teacher, female, 25, 
accompanied by three students
2 
min
4.1  Process Guidelines and Activities
4.1  Process Guidelines and Activities
•	
Taking the bus home from work or school after dusk
•	
Walking around the neighborhood at night
•	
Exercising in a public space/plaza/park etc. in the morning (e.g. running, playing 
soccer)
•	
Walking to work or school by yourself
•	
Using a public bathroom after dusk
•	
Walking home at night from the grocery store, with grocery bags
•	
Visiting a police station to report a crime committed against you
•	
Walking down the street when you hear a woman screaming for help — do you go 
to investigate? 	
	
After the facilitators have finished reading the different scenarios, each participant 
puts their nametag on, says their profile out loud, and takes stock of what position 
they ended up in. Facilitators begin a conversation about why each character 
ended up in a certain position by asking the following questions:
•	
What was your character? 
•	
Where did this character end up?
•	
How did you feel during the scenarios? Why?
•	
What can we learn about the experiences of different people given what we 
have seen here?
8 
min
Women line up in preparation for the Step Up scenarios

=== Página 40 ===
78
79
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
PROMOTING BUY-IN
3F   Star Diagram
4.1  Process Guidelines and Activities
GATHERING DATA
3G  Walk Audit
4.1  Process Guidelines and Activities
Give each woman a diagram and ask them to fill it out according to the questions 
in each category (home, public space, public transport, basic services, emergency 
services, welfare and safety, and social support).
The facilitator(s) ask(s) the group to discus how they feel in each category and 
why.
The facilitator wraps up the activity by discussing what the gender-inclusive aims 
of the project or plan are in relation to the focus area (public space, transit system, 
infrastructure amenities, housing development, etc.).
10 
min
10 
min
5 
min
OBJECTIVES: 1) Create a shared understanding of why gender perspectives are important to 
consider in urban planning and design and 2) evaluate feelings of safety in different parts of a 
neighborhood. 
MATERIALS: Star diagram (example on the following page), pens
Facilitators introduce the activity and review the overall steps.
Facilitators confirm the exact routes to be taken within a neighborhood the 
participants, and divide them into groups of 4-5 per route.
The groups go out to tour their routes and collect the information indicated below. 
Questions should be adapted where appropriate to include observations on sexual 
and gender minorities and people with disabilities:
•	
How many men and women can you see in the area walking or resting? 
•	
What activities are being carried out and who is participating? 
•	
Which of these activities makes you feel insecure? Which make you feel safe?
•	
Do you see people of any particular gender avoiding certain spaces in the area 
or the street? 
•	
In which spaces (such as a public space) do boys and girls play together, if 
any?
1.	 Do you think that the area and its surroundings fulfill the functions for which 
they were built? Why?
2.	 How well maintained is the area?                                                         
     	
Excellent      Well      Satisfactory      Bad     Very bad
3.	 What is your impression of the design of the neighborhood?                     
	
Excellent      Well      Satisfactory      Bad     Very bad
4.	 If you were not familiar with the neighborhood, would it be easy to orient 
yourself?
5 
min
10 
min
75 
min
OBJECTIVE: To document and examine the physical aspects and social uses of an area.  
MATERIALS: Walk audit questionnaire, physical conditions list, study area map, clipboards, pens

=== Página 41 ===
80
81
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
4.1  Process Guidelines and Activities
4.1  Process Guidelines and Activities
Map the following elements on your neighborhood map:
•	
Facilities and services: police station, formal or informal markets
•	
Transportation routes: pedestrian walkways, sidewalks, transit hubs
•	
Infrastructure and services: traffic signals, bus stops, lighting, benches, and 
trash facilities
•	
Any informal activity areas to learn, meet, exercise, or play
•	
Issue areas: graffiti, damaged infrastructure, bad maintenance, dark or insecure 
spaces
•	
Greenery: trees, lawns, plantings, etc. 
The groups gather in the space where they began together and review what 
they saw on the map, making sure that everything is marked correctly and filled 
out completely. The whole group talks about what they observed and learned. 
Participants are asked the following set of questions:
•	
What are the five words that best describe the area and its surroundings?
•	
What aspects of the area make you feel 1) scared or unsafe and 2) comfortable 
or safe?
•	
Do you feel safe walking alone during the day? Do you feel safe walking alone 
at night?
•	
What is your experience using the area?
•	
What might be the experience of someone with a disability using the area?
•	
What might be the experience of a young boy or girl using the area?
•	
What might be the experience of someone with a stroller using the area?
•	
What would you change to make the area safer?
•	
What positive aspects have you found?
•	
What activities would you and other people like to do in the area but are unable 
to due to a lack of space or other challenge?
•	
What do you think women can do in the area to create a safer space for women 
and girls? What do you think men can do?
45 
min
45 
min
GATHERING DATA
3H  Day in the life
OBJECTIVE: Learn about an area through the daily experiences of women and sexual 
and gender minority participants from the community.
MATERIALS: Journal, pens, map(s) of the area
Facilitators introduce the activity. Participants divide themselves into groups, ideally 
with their neighbors in the same group. The groups look at the maps to begin 
thinking about and identifying their typical daily routes. Facilitators join the groups 
as needed and feasible, and support with interpreting the maps. Maps may need to 
capture both neighborhood-scale and city-scale journeys.
With help from the facilitators, each group outlines their daily routines using the 
steps that follow:
•	
Each participant fills out a schedule with their daily activities. 
•	
Each participant locates all of the journeys, destinations, and activities that they 
do on the maps. 
In conjunction with the previous steps or when completing the timetable and map, 
each participant should describe the challenges that arise in their daily life while 
navigating these journeys. The facilitators, or a group leader if facilitators are not 
available, take notes and ask additional questions, including:
•	
What is your favorite part of the day? What is your least?
•	
Where do you feel secure or comfortable during your day? Where do you feel 
insecure or uncomfortable?
•	
If there was one thing you could change that would make things more convenient 
for you, what would it be?
•	
Is there any activity you would like to do but you cannot do? For what reason?
•	
Do you use the (transit system, public space, cultural amenities, etc.) regularly 
or not? If not, why not? What would allow you to use it more often? (Consider 
issues of cost, safety, access etc.)
Based on these conversations, the facilitator and the participants determine key 
places to visit and observe, which are feasible to get to within the next hour.
5 
min
40 
min

=== Página 42 ===
82
83
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
The groups reunite in the indoor space. Each small group shares their general 
observations with the larger group. Facilitators make detailed notes and provide 
feedback as appropriate. 
15 
min
The groups visit the selected places and routes. The facilitator takes pictures and 
notes, and asks additional questions based on the observations made in the places 
and on the road, including:
•	
Is this the most direct way? If not, why do you take this road or path?
•	
Is there any alternative activity or route that you take under certain circumstances? 
What conditions or situations cause your route to change?
•	
Would you show me where you feel most secure or comfortable during your 
day?
•	
Would you show me where you feel most insecure or uncomfortable during 
your day?
Facilitators should ask the participants about their thoughts on what would improve 
the neighborhood and their ability to move through it.
60 
min
Women lead city social workers through their daily routes in La Favorita, Mendoza
4.1  Process Guidelines and Activities
GATHERING DATA
3I   Public Space Checklist
Facilitators introduce the activity and review the overall steps.
Participant group splits up into smaller focus groups in order to walk around the 
physical space. Each group is asked to answer the following questions (at a minimum 
to evaluate the level of inclusivity of the public space), and make notations on a map:
INFRASTRUCTURE AND COMFORT:
•	
Are there well-maintained and adequate public toilets for both men and women?
•	
Are there rubbish bins throughout the public space?
•	
Are there places to sit and rest?  
•	
Is there adequate shade?
•	
Are there vendors or kiosks?
•	
Note on map issue areas of infrastructure and comfort.
CONNECTIVITY:
•	
Is the public space easily accessed from the surrounding neighborhood?
•	
Are there sidewalks surrounding the public space?
•	
Do the paths within the park take people where they want to go, or are people 	
consistently walking off paths for more convenience?
•	
Are there transit stops located nearby for enhanced connectivity?
•	
Is there adequate directional signage or wayfinding within the space?
•	
Note on the map where the main points of connectivity are.
PUBLIC SAFETY:
•	
Are there clear sight lines within the public space? Is the interior of the space 
visible from the street or entrances?
•	
Is there overgrown or non-maintained vegetation that hinders visibility?
•	
Are there fences or walls that block clear pathways to exits?
•	
Is there any visible policing? If so, when are they on duty?
•	
Are there people or groups of people within the park that make women feel unsafe?
•	
Is there the presence of alcohol or drug dealing?
•	
Note on map where there are areas that are perceived to have poor visibility  and 
low levels of public safety.
5 
min
20 
min
OBJECTIVE: To understand if a public space is well-designed and gender-inclusive. This 
checklist can be used to evaluate existing public spaces or new designs for public spaces.
MATERIALS: Public Space Questionnaire, site map, clipboards, pens
4.1  Process Guidelines and Activities

=== Página 43 ===
84
85
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
OCCUPANCY:
•	
Are there people using the public space, and at what times?
•	
What types of activities are people engaged in? Is there a mix of physically active 
and more sedentary recreational opportunities?
•	
Are people using the space to stop and rest, or are they passing through it? 	
	
What are the areas that people are using the most?
•	
Is there a mix of men, women, girls, and boys using the public space? What ages?
•	
Is the space accessible to people with disabilities or with special needs?
•	
Note the demographic breakdown of people using the space, what kind of 	 	
activities they are partaking in, and where.
LIGHTING: 
•	
Are the existing lights in working condition?
•	
Are the lights distributed evenly so all parts of the public space are well-lit?
•	
Are all pedestrian walkways lit?
•	
Note on the map areas where there are issues with lighting.
When the assessment is complete, each group shares their map and notes with all 
of the participants. Facilitators should ask follow up questions to further understand 
the observations.
10 
min
Women using a public space checklist to evaluate their local plaza
4.1  Process Guidelines and Activities
3J   Challenge and Solution
ENGAGING WOMEN, GIRLS, AND SEXUAL  
AND GENDER MINORITIES IN DESIGN
Each participant receives 5 to 10 sticky notes and is asked to write challenges that 
women, girls, and sexual and gender minorities of different ages and abilities face in 
the local urban environment (one challenge per note).
After writing them down, each participant puts their notes on the wall or a poster. The 
facilitators organize the challenges by theme according to the issues that arise, such 
as public transportation, public space activities, economy, etc
The participants are divided into small groups according to the topics. Each group 
considers the following question:
What would you design or propose that would solve this particular category of problem?
Each participant can write or draw their answers. The participant's answers are then 
shared within their small group. The facilitators prepare a list of solutions identified 
by each group, and read the lists aloud, one group at a time, to all participants. Each 
participant votes three times on their preferred solutions, and then the facilitators add 
up the votes to identify the five most popular and important solutions within each list.
10 
min
5 
min
25 
min
OBJECTIVE: Begin to analyze the various challenges women, girls, and sexual and gender 
minorities of different ages and abilities face in the urban environment.
MATERIALS: Sticky notes, markers, pens, poster or blackboard
A woman shows potential solutions to 
neighborhood children to get their votes.
4.1  Process Guidelines and Activities

=== Página 44 ===
86
87
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
3.	 Indicate where you want lighting to be located, using the color: ____.
Facilitators explain the activity. Each group receives an aerial map and a pack of 
images, markers, pens, glue and sticky notes. Facilitators ask:
What does your ideal public space look like, specifically one that takes your needs 
and the needs of other women and sexual and gender minorities of all ages and 
abilities into account? 
Participants use their materials to show how they would design their public space, 
with the following prompts:
1.	 In the color____, draw the sidewalks and pathways you would like to use to pass 
through the public space. The sidewalks may be the same as those that currently exist, 
be similar to what currently exists, or be completely different than what currently exists. 
2.	 Choose materials from the following list that you would like the sidewalks to be built 
with. Label the sidewalks with that material.
10 
min
20 
min
OBJECTIVE: Invite women, girls, and sexual and gender minorities to reimagine what a 
built project would look like if it served their needs and the needs of the community more 
fully (please note that this activity can be altered for different focus areas aside from a public 
space, such as a neighborhood zone, transit route or system, housing development, etc.).
MATERIALS: Aerial image of project site space, different colored markers, cut-out images of 
public spaces and people in them
•	
Natural soil
•	
Grass
•	
Mud
•	
Concrete
•	
Rubber
•	
Cobble
•	
Brick
•	
Gravel
•	
Paved
•	
Natural stone
3K  Design Your Own
ENGAGING WOMEN, GIRLS, AND SEXUAL  
AND GENDER MINORITIES IN DESIGN
4.1  Process Guidelines and Activities
A plaza redesign envisioned by women in La Favorita, Mendoza
4.1  Process Guidelines and Activities
4.	 Indicate where you want to have furniture/equipment, using different colors for 
each one. 
•	
Bathrooms, using color: ____
•	
Water fountains, using color: ____
•	
Trash cans, using color: ____
•	
Benches, using color: ____
•	
Tables, using color: ____
•	
Sports fields, using color: ____
•	
Other, using color: ____
Participants use the materials to create a collage of their overall vision. Facilitators 
should encourage them to share their views on each image/amenity that informed 
their group’s decisions. If the participants cannot find an image/amenity they are 
looking for within the printed images available, they can use the pens and sticky 
notes to draw or describe their vision using short sentences.
When they are done, each group shares their map with all of the participants. 
Facilitators should ask follow-up questions and encourage participants to do the 
same in order to further understand why certain decisions were made.
20 
min
10 
min

=== Página 45 ===
88
89
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
4.1  Process Guidelines and Activities
4.1  Process Guidelines and Activities
Process Guidelines and Activities 
(continued)
APPLICATION 
FRAMEWORK
IMPLEMENTATION
Create inclusive strategies and frameworks for project implementation that 
allow for women and sexual and gender minorities to access multiple kinds 
of economic development opportunities. Though the construction industry is 
currently dominated by men, there are many opportunities for women and 
sexual and gender minorities to contribute to the implementation and long-
term maintenance of design projects, either through professional avenues 
such as mandated contracting objectives, or through other options such as 
microfinancing. These strategies promote sustainable and gender-inclusive 
economic development, thereby strengthening the ability of women and 
sexual and gender minorities to be design stewards and decision-makers in 
their communities.
CONTRACTING OBJECTIVES
Ratify gender-inclusive procurement and contracting procedures that 
integrate requirements, specifications, and criteria that prioritize women and 
sexual and gender minority entrepreneurship. These provisions improve both 
the short-term and long-term financial independence and stability of women 
and sexual and gender minorities, which can lead to improved education and 
health outcomes, among other societal benefits. 
On the following page is a list of contracting procedures that support women 
and sexual and gender minorities:
•	
Hire research, planning, and design consultants owned by women or 
sexual and gender minorities
•	
Hire skilled workers, such as carpenters, metal-smiths, or contractors for 
the project construction, that are women or sexual and gender minorities
•	
Train and pay women and sexual and gender minorities to participate in the 
long-term maintenance and/or monitoring of a project
•	
Prioritize businesses owned by women and sexual and gender minorities 
4
A
B
for placement in permanent development projects
•	
Stipulate a quota of 50% or more women employees hired for a given 
project 
•	
Hire women and sexual and gender minorities to hold highly visible jobs, 
such as public transit jobs or security guards, to promote safety, comfort, 
and access for others.
MICROFINANCE
Ensure women and sexual and gender minorities who have participated 
in the development process have equitable access to and ownership of the 
completed project by making non-traditional financing mechanisms, such as 
microfinance, available. Around the world, women and sexual and gender 
minorities often face unequal access to traditional banking methods and 
land ownership, preventing them from establishing financial independence. 
Auditing these challenges as part of a MEAL framework (as described in 
Step 2) and providing microfinance opportunities such as affordable housing 
credits, community-based savings and loans, or long-term collective leases 
or land titles to community cooperatives, can improve the ability of women 
and sexual and gender minorities to gain financial independence. Microfinance 
provisions that enable equitable access should be set in motion early on in 
the project planning phase, so that resources can be utilized immediately 
following completion. Such resources can act as buffers against market forces 
and promote collective community structures and mechanisms to increase 
resilience. 
C

=== Página 46 ===
90
91
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
spur creativity, further exploration, and innovation — helping inspire project and consultant 
teams, especially when they are unsure of how to begin. It is important to note that each 
of these strategies and activities must be analyzed and adapted based on the project type, 
cultural context, and specifics of the community being served.
Guidelines
Each plan and project type has an individual section that dives more deeply into specific 
strategies and standards for creating a more gender-inclusive built environment. The 
guidelines are presented in bullet point format to prompt implementation teams to think 
about useful standards and considerations for gender inclusion. Urban design projects in 
particular (streetscapes, public space, and housing) put forward minimum standards for 
consideration in design processes, where appropriate. Short case studies are provided for 
each plan and project type to further illustrate some of the selected practices, and concrete 
examples are given throughout the guidelines themselves to provide context.  
Application and Further Resources
Following these guidelines and applying the minimum standards put forward for one plan or 
project type will influence progress in many other areas. Close coordination across sectors, 
plans, and project types, as well as collaboration with implementing agencies, will help 
ensure that broader needs are met, efforts are not duplicated, and the quality of responses 
across sectors is optimized. For example, where standards for streetscapes are not met, 
the importance of meeting public space standards is heightened due to the interconnected 
nature of these public elements and their fundamental gender impacts. Ideally, a Terms of 
Reference document for one plan or project will influence, extend, and connect to others. 
These cross-linkages are signaled throughout the guidelines. 
Where national or municipal standards are lower than suggested standards in these 
guidelines, implementing organizations should work with the government to progressively 
raise standards, including through the allowance for special dispensation for testing 
progressive standards in pilot or innovative project investments.
To support all of the content in the guidelines, a list of resources is provided at the end 
of each plan and project section for further reading, reference, and inspiration. Users are 
invited to mix, match, or merge the guidelines and activities, and, most importantly, to tailor, 
test, and adapt them to the unique context of the communities and urban settings in which 
the work is taking place.
4.2  Planning and Project Guidelines
The guidelines provided in this section focus on how the design and implementation of 
urban plans and built projects can and should be done in a manner that is gender-inclusive. 
The plan and project types included in this section were defined in collaboration with World 
Bank staff, including senior specialists and TTLs. They refer to a broad set of project and 
planning typologies, many of which are often initiated, financed, and shaped by the Bank. 
1.	 The Planning Guidelines put forward a set of strategic considerations and suggestions 
for each planning process.
2.	 The Project Guidelines focus on concrete design standards and implementation 
strategies for each sector and project type. 
The guidelines themselves were developed based on extensive literature review and 
interviews with World Bank and other experts, as well as the practical experience of the 
consultant team. Where minimum standards are put forward, they emerge from a close 
cross-referencing of existing guidance specific to gender-inclusive design where there is a 
degree of universality in the approach. 
HOW TO USE THE PLANNING AND PROJECT GUIDELINES
Key Issue Area Wheel
The Issue Area Wheel provides a quick visual summary of which gender-related issues 
discussed in Chapter 2 — access, mobility, safety and so on — would likely be the focus 
of a given plan or project type and form the basis of Monitoring, Evaluation, Accountability, 
and Learning. See overleaf for more detail on this graphic.
Activities
Drawing directly from the seven activities described in STEP 3: Participation Framework 
in Chapter 4.1, suggested activities are given for each plan and project type to provide 
guidance on how to achieve a gender-inclusive process. These activities fall into three 
categories:
•	
Buy-in: Guidance on how to sensitize stakeholders to the topic of gender and encourage 
their commitment to and ownership over the project
•	
Data: Guidance on how to understand existing conditions and collect meaningful data 
that shows how gender inequities manifest in the built environment
•	
Design: Guidance on how to ensure equal representation and elevate the expertise of 
women, girls, and sexual and gender minorities of all ages and abilities in designing 
solutions to gender inequity
The selection of activities is not supposed to be exclusive or restrictive, but is intended to 
Planning and 
Project Guidelines

=== Página 47 ===
93
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
92
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
Chapter 2 introduced in detail the key issue areas of Access, Mobility, Safety and Freedom 
from Violence, Health and Hygiene, Climate Resilience, and Security of Tenure. These six 
themes highlight where and how the current realities in the built urban environment interact 
with, and often exacerbate, gender inequities. 
There are critical intersections between all of the issue areas and the project and plan 
types, highlighted in the diagram opposite. However, issue areas are shown as either “key” 
or “additional”. This distinction is made to help the reader understand which areas they 
should focus on most intensely in a project. In particular, the “key issues” can form the basis 
for a set of gender indicators within a robust MEAL framework. For example, a robust MEAL 
framework for an Urban Land Management Plan would likely include gender indicators that 
measure changes in access, mobility, climate resilience, and security of tenure — the “key 
issues” for that plan typology. Examples of actual indicators used by World Bank teams in 
FY17-19 are given for each issue area in Chapter 4.1.
The designation of “key” and “additional” issue areas was carefully considered, discussed, 
and debated against the background of a wide literature related to gender and the built 
environment, much of which is referenced in these guidelines. The designation is not meant 
to be conclusive or restrictive — of course issues will vary in their gravity from country, to 
city, to neighborhood, to street. The figure opposite is a starting point for identifying and 
debating the wider gender issues emanating from society and the built environment. 
Ultimately, the guidelines, activities, and relative emphasis of gender issues must be 
adapted to the unique context of the communities and urban settings in which the work is 
taking place, and this process should be carried out in collaboration with residents from 
those places. 
Issue Area Wheel
Access
Mobility
Safety and Freedom 
from Violence
Health and Hygiene
Climate Resilience
Security of Tenure
Key Issue/s
Additional Issue/s
4.2  Planning and Project Guidelines
  U
rba
n L
and
     
     
     
   M
etro
pol
ita
n   
     
    
Ma
ste
r Pl
an 
+   
     
     
City
 M
obi
lity
 + 
    I
nfo
rma
l N
eig
hbo
rho
od 
    
Nei
ghb
orh
ood
     
    
City
 Cl
im
ate
 Ac
tio
n   
     
   D
isa
ste
r R
isk
     
     
  In
fra
stru
ctu
re 
and
     
     
     
Ene
rgr
y   
     
     
     
     
Wat
er 
+   
     
     
    
Sol
id 
Wa
ste
     
     
   C
om
mu
nic
atio
ns 
     
     
  H
ous
ing
     
     
    
Pub
lic 
Tra
nsp
orta
tio
n,  
  St
ree
tsc
ape
s   
     
     
 Pu
blic
 Sp
ace
    
     
     
     
   
Ma
na
ge
me
nt  
    
    
   D
eve
lop
me
nt  
     
Int
egr
ate
d U
rba
n   
    
  T
ran
sp
ort
atio
n   
     
   U
pgr
adi
ng 
  
  D
eve
lop
me
nt  
     
     
   A
ctio
n P
lan
s   
     
   M
an
ag
em
ent
     
     
     
Ba
sic 
Urb
an 
    
    
    
     
    
     
     
     
     
     
Sa
nita
tio
n   
     
     
 M
an
ag
em
ent
    
    
     
   +
 IC
T  
      
     
     
    
    
    
    
    
     
    
     
Mo
bilit
y, 
+ R
oa
d
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
 Pl
an
s   
    
    
 D
eve
lop
me
nt 
Pla
ns 
    
    
  P
lan
s   
    
    
    
    
   P
lan
s  
    
   P
lan
s   
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
     
Ser
vic
es 
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
     
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
Saf
ety
Issue Area Wheel

=== Página 48 ===
95
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
94
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design, 2020
Planning 
Guidelines
Urban Land 
Management
Urban Land Management processes define how land is accessed, held, transferred, 
developed, and regulated, with the intention of ensuring efficient and equitable allocation 
and utilization of urban land. Tools and practices can include land rights, records and 
registration; enumerations for tenure security; land co-management between government 
and communities; land record management for transactability; land use planning; informal 
neighborhood upgrading plans; land readjustment (slum upgrading and/or post crisis); land 
management, administration, and information; land law and enforcement; and land value 
taxation, among others (UN-HABITAT, 2008a). Competing interests must be well-managed 
and land use benefits equitably distributed in order to promote the land rights of women and 
sexual and gender minorities, and to enable them to maintain their livelihoods and homes. 
Successful Urban Land Management also depends on a commitment to secure tenure for 
all segments of society; transparent and participatory decision-making; and adherence to 
the rule of law.
CASE STUDY
In Uganda, local land rights activists turned to the Global Land Tool Network’s 
(GLTN) Gender Evaluation Criteria as a guide through the complex and layered 
policies that impact women’s access to land. Using the criteria, the Uganda 
Land Alliance conducted participatory gender evaluation assessments which 
identified an overrepresentation of men in land management decision-making 
bodies. This finding led to the development of a national action plan to better 
incorporate women in land management entities. The Gender Evaluation Criteria 
is available for download on the GLTN website.

=== Página 49 ===
96
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
4.2.1  Planning Guidelines
Urb
an 
La
nd
Ma
na
ge
me
nt
RECOMMENDED PROCESS ACTIVITIES
Day in the Life
Walk Audit
Step Up
Star Diagram
Challenge and 
Solution
Design Your Own 
___
DATA
BUY-IN
DESIGN
Public Space 
Checklist
Key Issue Area/s
Additional Issue Area/s
Access
Mobility
Safety and Freedom from Violence
Health and Hygiene
Climate Resilience
Security of Tenure
ISSUE AREA WHEEL

=== Página 50 ===
98
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
4.2.1  Planning Guidelines
•	
Collect quantitative and qualitative information on how social relations impact 
land access — including marital, intra-household, and community relationships, as 
well as cultural and religious norms — in order to identify where adjustments in existing 
land management systems are required. 
•	
Build gender-disaggregated statistical profiles of community members’ 
experiences with land access, use, ownership, and management to identify gaps 
or deficiencies in existing and commonly-used land management tools and practices.
•	
Reform urban land management practices and tools to promote gender inclusion 
by actively engaging women and sexual and gender minorities of all ages and abilities 
in the development process. 
•	
Use a gendered lens to analyze land management tools such as land use planning, 
land readjustment, or land rights by gathering data to understand how stakeholders’ 
experiences differ according to their gender.
•	
Assess various mechanisms for achieving security of tenure for women and 
sexual and gender minorities, which could include long-term rental contracts, formal 
recognition of customary land rights, and collective land titles, among others. Collective 
tenure rights, for example, often function as a buffer against market forces and promote 
social cohesion and resilience.
•	
Identify alternative, accessible, and affordable land-finance mechanisms such as 
community savings groups. These are often especially attractive to women and sexual 
and gender minorities, as they can provide credit quickly in times of crisis and start-
up loans for income-generating activities, as well as improving social inclusion and 
knowledge exchange.
•	
Employ community-based savings and loan schemes as “brokers” for channeling 
loans to poor communities. These provide governments and lending institutions with 
an established, capable management mechanism whereby communities manage loan 
disbursal and repayments as a group, reducing the lending institution’s overhead.
RESOURCES
A Training Package: Improving Gender Equality and Grassroots Participation through 
Good Land Governance (UN-HABITAT) — 2010. 
Gendering Land Tools: Achieving Secure Tenure for Women and Men (UN-HABITAT) 
— 2008. 
Handling Land: Innovative Tools for Land Governance and Secure Tenure (UN-
HABITAT) — 2012.
Policy Makers Guide To Women's Land, Property, and Housing Rights Across the 
World (UN-HABITAT) — 2007.

=== Página 51 ===
100
101
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
Metropolitan 
Development Plans
Metropolitan Development Plans encompass both cities and their surroundings to account 
for broader economic and geographical interdependencies and address the social and 
political interests that cities share with neighborhoods that lie beyond municipal boundaries. 
They seek to improve access to opportunities and aim to balance the impacts of urbanization 
on the environment and different economic centers. Metropolitan Development Plans often 
involve various local governments to create synergies in infrastructure and public service 
provision between sub-centers, surrounding settlements, and the principle city, which often 
share economic and labor markets. Metropolitan Development Plans can span land use, 
transportation and mobility, open space, environment, communication, water resources, 
and housing, as well as economic development and resilience. With so many interdependent 
and far-reaching elements, the active inclusion of women and sexual and gender minorities 
in Metropolitan Development Plans is essential to avoiding adverse impacts and ensuring 
cross-cutting gender issues are successfully and comprehensively addressed.
In 1994, Bulacan, Philippines created The Provincial Commission for Women 
through an executive order, making it the first commission of its kind to inform 
regional planning decisions with a gender lens. Comprised of local grassroots 
leaders, the Commission has led efforts to advocate for the participation of 
women in the development process as well as creating new service programs 
and resource facilities, such as the Marilao Special Education and Women's 
Center, which provides education and caregiving to local special needs children.
Source: Gender Mainstreaming — UN-HABITAT, 2008b
CASE STUDY
     
     
    
Met
rop
olit
an
    
    
     
  D
eve
lop
me
nt
    
    
    
    
   P
lan
s
RECOMMENDED PROCESS ACTIVITIES
Day in the Life
Walk Audit
Step Up
Star Diagram
Challenge and 
Solution
Design Your Own 
___
Public Space 
Checklist
Access
Mobility
Safety and Freedom from Violence
Health and Hygiene
Climate Resilience
Security of Tenure
Key Issue Area/s
Additional Issue Area/s
ISSUE AREA WHEEL
4.2.1  Planning Guidelines
DATA
BUY-IN
DESIGN

=== Página 52 ===
RESOURCES
Gender and Access (Institute for Transportation and Development Policy and  Women’s 
Environment and Development Organization) — 2018.
Gender in Mainstreaming Urban Development Berlin: On the Path Towards becoming a 
Metropolis worth Living in for Women and Men (Senate Department for Urban Development 
Berlin) — 2011. 
Gender Inequalities in Cities: Urban 20 White Paper (Inter-American Development Bank) — 
2018.
State of Women in Cities 2012-2013: Gender and Prosperity of Cities (UN-HABITAT) — 2013. 
102
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
•	
Promote the development of multi-functional sub-centers (i.e. polycentric 
development) so that people of all genders, regardless of their roles and responsibilities, 
can access basic goods and services within proximity to residential areas without 
making long trips into the main/core city.
•	
Integrate transport and land use considerations to reduce the number of 
neighborhoods or settlements with limited access to economic opportunities, services, 
or infrastructure within the metro region, thereby making it easier to balance care work 
with economic activity.
•	
Promote the distribution of economic opportunities throughout the metro region 
to enhance access to employment, reduce commutes, and avoid unsustainable, 
monocentric development, which can negatively impact the compatibility of care work 
with economic work as well as limit participation in the public realm.
•	
Expand public transport systems to neighborhoods in peripheral areas of the 
metro region to enhance inclusion and participation in public life for women, sexual and 
gender minorities, and people with disabilities, especially in cities where low-income 
areas are outside the main city.
•	
Promote the creation or protection of a network of green, accessible, and safe 
public spaces throughout the metro region of various sizes and uses to provide 
sufficient and convenient opportunities for recreation, play, and exercise, and to help 
mitigate the negative impacts of climate change and air pollution, which often burden 
women and girls, as primary caregivers, in particular.
•	
Restore and rehabilitate contaminated waterways and water bodies to reduce 
exposure to health risks, particularly for women and children who might spend more 
time in residential areas on the metro’s periphery.
4.2.1  Planning Guidelines

=== Página 53 ===
104
105
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
Master Plans and Integrated 
Urban Development Plans
City Master Plans and Integrated Urban Development Plans provide a shared vision for the 
future of a city — guiding growth and development, creating connections between different 
land uses, and balancing sectoral and spatial development requirements with efficient and 
sustainable use of land and natural resources. Although they are two different planning 
tools with distinct planning processes and underlying ideologies, well-executed City Master 
Plans and Integrated Urban Development Plans both aim to improve spatial integration and 
connectivity, human security, and resilience. Guidelines for both types of plan are given 
here to cover the breadth of urban planning approaches used in different regions around 
the world. In both typologies, neighborhood density and mobility are key areas of concern 
for women and other primary caregivers balancing care work with income generation.
CASE STUDY
In Belén, Costa Rica, incorporating gender into master planning processes took 
a two-fold approach. First, staff and senior management within the municipality 
were required to attend capacity-building workshops with local women’s 
organizations to better understand the needs and perspectives of women. 
Second, a system of monitoring and evaluation was put in place to ensure 
municipal engagements met their gender inclusion goals and reached target 
beneficiaries to incorporate their needs and considerations into master plans 
and similar guiding documents.  
Source: Gender Mainstreaming — UN-HABITAT, 2008b
RECOMMENDED PROCESS ACTIVITIES
Day in the Life
Walk Audit
Step Up
Star Diagram
Challenge and 
Solution
Design Your Own 
___
Public Space 
Checklist
ISSUE AREA WHEEL
     
 M
ast
er 
Pla
n +
     
   
  In
teg
rat
ed 
Urb
an 
    
   
    
    
    
    
De
vel
op
me
nt 
Pla
ns 
    
    
  
Access
Mobility
Safety and Freedom from Violence
Health and Hygiene
Climate Resilience
Security of Tenure
Key Issue Area/s
Additional Issue Area/s
4.2.1  Planning Guidelines
DATA
BUY-IN
DESIGN

=== Página 54 ===
106
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
•	
Avoid following existing or inherited urban planning standards that fail to consider 
the needs of women and sexual and gender minorities in order to prevent new plans 
from replicating inadequate or discriminatory models. In many former colonies, planning 
standards once introduced to segregate ethnic and racial groups are still applied today, 
impacting low-income women disproportionately by limiting their access to opportunities 
and services. 
•	
Prioritize the development of context-appropriate spatial strategies and minimum 
working standards to ensure gender-inclusive urban development in diverse urban 
planning contexts. This applies particularly to former colonies, where planning standards 
introduced during colonial times conflict with today’s urban realities of rapid population 
growth, high population density, and limited availability of urban land. Such standards need 
to be revised and adjusted to avoid displacement and provide access to public infrastructure 
and services in low-income and high-density settlements. 
•	
Stipulate the development of affordable, secure, and decent housing with diverse, 
context-appropriate housing typologies and a range of tenure systems to accommodate 
various household types, lifestyles, and financial capacities.
•	
Create high-density, mixed-use neighborhoods with short distances to key economic 
opportunities and social infrastructure and services to facilitate the compatibility of 
gainful employment, supply of goods and services, and care work while reducing demand 
for vehicular transport.
•	
Link industrial and local business areas and facilities for easier access to and supply 
of everyday goods and services. 
•	
Provide adequate, context-specific infrastructure and basic services within 
convenient proximity of housing to ensure ease of access for all residents. Depending 
on the context, a range of proximity (e.g. between 250 meters and 500 meters walking 
distance) should be determined and vetted with residents to ensure services are conveniently 
located. Further details can be found in the Housing section of the Project Guidelines within 
this handbook.
•	
Integrate an inclusive, convenient, safe, active, accessible, affordable, transit-
oriented, and multi-modal transportation system into the plan to enhance access, 
economic opportunity, social inclusion, and the combination of caregiving and economic 
activity for women, girls, and sexual and gender minorities, especially those with disabilities 
or without cars. Such transportation systems also avoid segregation of low-income 
neighborhoods and promote general connectivity and inclusion for all. 
•	
Restore and rehabilitate contaminated waterways and water bodies to reduce 
exposure to health risks that burden women, as primary caregivers, in particular.
4.2.1  Planning Guidelines
RESOURCES
Discussion Paper 7: Gender in Planning and Urban Development (Commonwealth 
Secretariat) — 2009.
Gender and Urban Planning: Issues and Trends (UN-HABITAT) — 2012. 
Gender Mainstreaming in Urban Development: Berlin Handbook (Women’s Advisory 
Committee of the Senate Department for Urban Development) — 2011.
Gender Mainstreaming (UN-HABITAT) — 2008. 
Manual for Gender Mainstreaming in Urban Planning and Urban Development (Urban 
Development Vienna, Municipal Department 18) — 2013.

=== Página 55 ===
108
109
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
City Mobility and 
Transportation Plans
City Mobility and Transportation Plans guide the development of municipal transportation 
infrastructure, with the aim of promoting the efficient, sustainable, and equitable movement 
of people and goods. Mobility and Transportation Plans set forth street designations and 
hierarchies as well as locating transit, bicycle, and pedestrian infrastructure. In addition 
to improving quality of life, mobility and transportation plans often aim to address air and 
noise pollution, greenhouse gas emissions, and energy consumption. Often, gendered 
concerns around care-related travel, accessing basic services, and time poverty as a result 
of inefficient travel are systematically underrepresented in transportation statistics (ITDP, 
2018). Additionally, the location of new rail and road corridors without sufficient community 
input can lead to informal neighborhoods being displaced or resettled, disproportionately 
impacting women, children, and people with disabilities.
CASE STUDY
In 2013, in an effort to create a more equitable public transportation system, 
Transport for London (TfL) undertook an initiative focusing on gender gaps in 
five categories: accessibility, safety and security, affordability, information, and 
employment. Through speaking with 140 different women’s groups, TfL drafted 
an action plan and a four-year initiative called Action on Equality. The initiative 
took forward suggestions such as accessible bus stops, more legible maps, 
improved lighting at bus stops, a diverse transportation workforce, priority seating 
for women and the elderly, and real-time schedule information on buses.
Sources: TFL, 2016
RECOMMENDED PROCESS ACTIVITIES
Day in the Life
Walk Audit
Step Up
Star Diagram
Challenge and 
Solution
Design Your Own 
___
Public Space 
Checklist
     
     
 Ci
ty 
Mo
bili
ty 
+   
     
      
     
  
    
    
    
 Tr
an
sp
ort
ati
on 
     
     
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
Pla
ns 
    
    
      
     
    
  
Access
Mobility
Safety and Freedom from Violence
Health and Hygiene
Climate Resilience
Security of Tenure
Key Issue Area/s
Additional Issue Area/s
ISSUE AREA WHEEL
4.2.1  Planning Guidelines
DATA
BUY-IN
DESIGN

=== Página 56 ===
110
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
•	
Provide flexible, affordable, convenient, accessible, safe, multi-modal transportation 
options that respond to gendered behaviors, such as trip-chaining, reliance on walking 
or public transit, and making “non wage-earning” trips for leisure and reproductive work.
•	
Locate transport nodes within a 500 meters of each other and of housing, services, 
and workplaces, to the extent feasible, to promote connectivity for all transportation users 
and especially those making multipurpose trips.
•	
Promote the concept of a polycentric “city of short distances” with mixed-use 
development, decentralized services, and comprehensive transportation services to allow 
for the efficient combination of work, family errands, caregiving trips, and shopping.
•	
Prioritize the implementation of affordable housing in areas with accessibility 
to rapid transit (or reliable transit where rapid transit doesn’t exist). Social housing 
developments should be located within a 500 meter walk from a rapid transit stop/station to 
avoid isolation and segregation.
•	
Plan new rail and road corridors with cognizance of varying land statuses and 
income brackets and enable appropriate, pro-poor, and consultative re-housing and re-
settlement where required.
•	
Implement measures to slow vehicular traffic, such reduced vehicle lanes (road diets), 
raised crosswalks, and increased lane width for bicycles and public transit to improve road 
safety for all users, especially women and sexual and gender minorities with reduced 
mobility or young children. 
•	
Create pedestrian infrastructure and sidewalks that are sufficiently wide, adequately 
paved, and free from parked cars to allow for safe passage for pedestrians (ideally these 
should be a minimum of 2 meters in width). Infrastructure such as bollards can create 
separation to protect people on the sidewalk from vehicular traffic.
•	
Increase the frequency and reliability of transit services, particularly at night and 
on weekends, to reduce waiting times and provide convenient, safe service outside of 
traditional commuting hours. Include and advertize CCTV on buses or in stations where 
appropriate.
•	
Provide reduced or free school transportation services to increase access to 
educational opportunities for children of all genders and incomes, especially those in 
single-mother families.
•	
Provide adequate public lighting to increase visibility at night, particularly around bus 
stops, creating safer public spaces and pedestrian and biking infrastructure for women and 
sexual and gender minorities. Upgrade all lighting to LED.
4.2.1  Planning Guidelines
RESOURCES
Approaches for Gender Responsive Urban Mobility. Module 7a Sustainable Transport: A 
Sourcebook for Policy-Makers in Developing Cities (GIZ) — 2018.
Women and Transport in Indian Cities (Institute for Transportation and Development 
Policy) — 2017.
Gender and Access (Institute for Transportation and Development Policy and  Women’s 
Environment and Development Organization) — 2018.

=== Página 57 ===
112
113
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
CASE STUDY
In India, the Women Resource Zone (WRZ) approach is a model for incorporating 
women’s needs and rights into local neighborhood plans. In the village of Shivpuri, 
a network of organizations and land rights advocates led to the creation of a WRZ 
to delineate a neighborhood-level district aimed at deploying special measures 
and policies to include women in infrastructural development. Shivpuri’s WRZ led 
to the creation of a Women’s Assistance Center, spaces for economic production 
of commodities such as ghee, and spaces dedicated to reforestation and the 
growth of natural resources. 
Source: SAFP, 2013
Neighborhood
Development Plans
Neighborhood Development Plans are local, neighborhood-scale plans that lay out guidelines 
on issues as diverse as land use and development, housing, local economic development, 
environmental development and protection, community services development, and local 
private and public transport development requirements. Typically more detailed than City 
Master Plans or Integrated Urban Development Plans, Neighborhood Development Plans 
can define housing typologies, propose housing layouts, suggest building materials to use, 
set out size of plots, and define design requirements for private and public open space, 
as well as transport, social and public infrastructure, and other amenities.  Since this type 
of plan begins to define the feel and function of housing, public and civic spaces, and 
streetscapes, consulting women, girls, and sexual and gender minorities of all ages and 
abilities on how they wish to use these spaces is essential. Neighborhood Development 
Plans do not encompass neighborhood upgrading, which is discussed in the following 
section.
RECOMMENDED PROCESS ACTIVITIES
Day in the Life
Walk Audit
Step Up
Star Diagram
Challenge and 
Solution
Design Your Own 
___
Public Space 
Checklist
ISSUE AREA WHEEL
     
    
Nei
gh
bor
ho
od 
     
     
     
     
    
  D
ev
elo
pm
ent
     
     
     
    
   P
lan
s   
    
    
    
    
    
    
   
Access
Mobility
Safety and Freedom from 
Health and Hygiene
Climate Resilience
Security of Tenure
Key Issue Area/s
Additional Issue Area/s
4.2.1  Planning Guidelines
DATA
BUY-IN
DESIGN

=== Página 58 ===
115
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design, 2020
114
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
•	
Create high-density and mixed-use neighborhoods with short distances to key social 
services, public infrastructure, transit, and economic opportunity to facilitate the 
compatibility of gainful employment, supply of goods and services, and care work. Design 
spaces for economic opportunity and income generation close to housing developments in 
order to give caregivers access to income-generating opportunities.
•	
Plan for small neighborhood centers where public spaces are combined with key 
public and social services as well as supply of basic goods to improve access, provide 
opportunities for participation in the public realm, and promote social cohesion to increase 
safety for women and sexual and gender minorities.
•	
Plan for active and public transportation to improve access to economic and educational 
opportunities and enhance the compatibility of gainful employment, supply of goods and 
services, and caregiving. This could feature a robust network of sidewalks, dedicated 
cycling lanes, and rapid transit developed in conjunction with women and sexual and gender 
minorities of all ages and abilities. Further details can be found in the Project Guidelines 
on (i) Public Transport, Mobility Infrastructure, and Road Safety and (ii) Streetscapes within 
this handbook.
•	
Plan for diverse housing typologies, tenure systems, and layouts to ensure people 
with different lifestyles, household setups, and financial capacities have equitable access 
to quality housing.
•	
Plan the number of storeys of residential developments to enable visibility of public, 
open spaces for play and leisure, which can enhance safety and security.
•	
Balance private and communal open spaces for everyday tasks, children’s play, and 
leisure to stimulate exchange and contact between neighbors and enhance social cohesion 
and security within the neighborhood.  
•	
Create a broad mix of green spaces (including pocket parks, plazas, and regional 
parks) within close proximity of residential areas to provide opportunities for play, 
recreation and exercise; promote exchanges between diverse user groups; and mitigate the 
negative impacts of climate change and air pollution which put particular burdens on women 
and other primary caregivers. Further details can be found in the Public Space section of 
the Project Guidelines within this handbook.
•	
Design a network of plazas to provide civic spaces for recreational and social interaction. 
Plazas can contain seating, public art, and areas for relaxation or interaction, and should be 
designed to cater to a diverse set of user groups. 
•	
Provide adequate, context-specific infrastructure and basic services for all groups 
of society within convenient proximity to their homes to facilitate access and enhance 
compatibility of caregiving responsibilities with other tasks and roles.
4.2.1  Planning Guidelines
RESOURCES
Gender Mainstreaming in Urban Development: Berlin Handbook (Women’s Advisory 
Committee of the Senate Department for Urban Development) — 2011.
Gender and Urban Planning: Issues and Trends (UN-HABITAT) — 2012. 
Manual for Gender Mainstreaming in Urban Planning and Urban Development (Urban 
Development Vienna, Municipal Department 18) — 2013.
A City That Plans: Reinventing Urban Planning. World Cities Report. United Nations 
Human Settlements Programme (UN-HABITAT) — 2016. 

=== Página 59 ===
116
117
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
CASE STUDY
The Caracas Slum Upgrading Project (CAMEBA) sought to improve the quality of 
life in various neighborhoods in Caracas, Venezuela through community-driven, 
sustainable, and replicable infrastructure improvements. Projects focused on 
improving pedestrian access, water distribution, sanitation, housing and other 
basic services. Broad outreach was conducted to ensure women’s participation. 
Successful outreach led to women making up the majority of meeting participants 
and developing proposals for the projects. Women supervised the projects, 
ensuring efficiency and effectiveness. Women’s participation and leadership 
improved household livelihoods and led to women claiming a more equal voice in 
household decision-making.
Source: Alemán, 2009
Informal Neighborhood
Upgrading Plans
Neighborhood upgrading is a comprehensive planning process that aims to gradually 
improve, formalize, and incorporate informal urban settlements or “slums” into formal cities. 
Well-executed upgrading plans will pave the way to increased and formalized access to land, 
employment, and citizenship; improved access to and quality of essential infrastructure, 
amenities, and economic, social, institutional, and community services; and environmental 
sustainability and community resilience. Within informal settlements, women, girls, and 
sexual and gender minorities of all ages and abilities are at a particular disadvantage, often 
facing insecure tenure, violence, poverty, severe hygiene and health challenges, and lack 
of agency in public life. As such it is crucial to center the priorities of these groups and work 
to overcome the basic challenges that disproportionately burden them — without negatively 
impacting the existing social networks or economic activities that may sustain them.
RECOMMENDED PROCESS ACTIVITIES
Day in the Life
Walk Audit
Step Up
Star Diagram
Challenge and 
Solution
Design Your Own 
___
Public Space 
Checklist
ISSUE AREA WHEEL
 In
for
ma
l N
eig
hb
orh
oo
d
    
    
 U
pg
rad
in
g P
lan
s
Access
Mobility
Safety and Freedom from 
Health and Hygiene
Climate Resilience
Security of Tenure
Key Issue Area/s
Additional Issue Area/s
4.2.1  Planning Guidelines
DATA
BUY-IN
DESIGN

=== Página 60 ===
118
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
•	
Consider interdependencies with surrounding formal areas, especially economic 
interdependencies and their gendered aspects. Proximity to earning opportunities 
is one of the main factors influencing where informal settlements are located and is an 
essential consideration for women balancing reproductive and productive roles.
•	
Avoid relocations, which tend to break up communities and destroy the social 
networks women depend on to balance paid and care work. Relocation sites tend to be 
located where land is available but public services and infrastructure have not yet been 
developed, reducing access to economic opportunities while increasing transportation 
costs to reach goods, public services, and infrastructure.  	
•	
Improve access to economic opportunity by planning for improved and safer 
footpaths and locating public transportation nodes within or in immediate proximity of 
low-income settlements.
•	
Prioritize upgrading buildings and amenities that facilitate and institutionalize 
informal economic activities, for example by improving access to and affordability of 
water, sanitation, energy, and other basic services so that informal businesses can run 
smoothly and profitably.
•	
Identify and ratify minimum working standards to secure basic levels of health 
and safety for all inhabitants, especially women and sexual and gender minorities 
of all ages and abilities, and to reconcile caregiving and economic activities within 
immediate proximity of potential new housing developments. 
•	
Prioritize mixed-use zoning (residential and commercial) in low-income 
settlements to promote home-based and other informal economic activity and to 
improve access to essential services and amenities.
•	
Limit land consumption, use land more efficiently, and plan for higher densities 
to reduce per-unit costs and allow for more efficient and affordable basic services, 
promoting long-term sustainability.
•	
Plan for active transportation such as walking and cycling, and affordable, 
transit-oriented transport systems to improve access to services, amenities, and 
economic and educational opportunities.
•	
Plan for inclusive, extensive, and safe networks of public spaces of various sizes 
and uses to promote full participation in public life for all genders. Further details can be 
found in the Public Space section of the Project Guidelines within this handbook.
•	
Integrate Neighborhood Upgrading Plans into City Master Plans and Integrated 
Urban Development Plans to enhance their potential for implementation and to avoid 
isolation or segregation of the settlement from the wider city, which disproportionately 
affects women’s economic and social well-being.
4.2.1  Planning Guidelines
RESOURCES
Gender and Urban Planning: Issues and Trends (UN-HABITAT) — 2012. 
Gender Issue Guide: Housing and Slum Upgrading (UN-HABITAT) — 2012.
Quick Guide 2: Low-Income Housing (UN-HABITAT) — 2008.
Quick Guide 3: Land — A Crucial Element in Housing the Urban Poor (UN-HABITAT) 
— 2011.
Quick Guide 5: Housing Finance — Ways to Help to Poor Pay for Housing (UN-
HABITAT) — 2008.

=== Página 61 ===
120
121
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
CASE STUDY
Initiated by the C40, a global network of 94 cities committed to addressing 
climate change, the Women4Climate conference aims to provide mentorship and 
resources to new leaders in climate action and highlight the key role women play 
in championing climate action in cities. The group’s network of female mayors 
and climate action leaders has taken part in such city-led projects as the London 
Sustainable Development Commission’s initiative to attract more women to 
local “cleantech” industries. The women have also provided guidance on active 
transportation data sourcing options for Barcelona’s 2016 Plan for Gender Justice.
Source: Women4Climate, 2019
City Climate 
Action Plans
Climate Action Plans aim to mainstream climate resilience as a key objective of urban 
planning while complementing a city’s broader socioeconomic and environmental goals. 
They can be standalone plans or incorporated into existing Master Plans, Integrated 
Urban Development Plans, or Municipal Plans. A Climate Action Plan typically includes 
both adaptation and mitigation measures, as well as strategies for monitoring, evaluation, 
communication, and public education. Like gender, climate is a cross-cutting issue that 
can touch on every aspect of daily life and the built environment. As such, a good Climate 
Action Plan will span several strategic areas and consider the complex interactions between 
physical, economic, and social vulnerability to address the disproportionate climate risk 
and stress that women, girls, and sexual and gender minorities face.
RECOMMENDED PROCESS ACTIVITIES
Day in the Life
Walk Audit
Step Up
Star Diagram
Challenge and 
Solution
Design Your Own 
___
Public Space 
Checklist
ISSUE AREA WHEEL
     
   C
ity
 Cl
im
ate
    
    
  A
cti
on
 Pl
an
s
Access
Mobility
Safety and Freedom from 
Health and Hygiene
Climate Resilience
Security of Tenure
Key Issue Area/s
Additional Issue Area/s
4.2.1  Planning Guidelines
DATA
BUY-IN
DESIGN

=== Página 62 ===
123
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design, 2020
122
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
4.2.1  Planning Guidelines
RESOURCES
Gender, Cities, and Climate Change: Thematic Report Prepared for Cities and Climate 
Change (UN-HABITAT) — 2011. 
Gender and Urban Change (International institute for Environment and Development) — 
2013.
Gender and Urban Climate Policy: Gender-Sensitive Policies Make a Difference (UN-
HABITAT) — 2015.
Gender and the Environment (Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency) 
— 2016.
Social and Gender Inequalities in Environment and Health (World Health Organization, 
Regional Office for Europe) — 2010.
•	
Promote the greening of existing and new infrastructures and buildings such as 
facades, rooftops, roads, and walls (vertical gardening) to reduce heat island effects 
and combat air pollution — risks that disproportionately burden children, women, and 
other primary caregivers.
•	
Promote low-carbon and renewable energy sources to women, girls, and sexual 
and gender minorities through awareness activities and projects in order to 
promote cleaner cooking and more efficient energy consumption in the household.
•	
Plan for adequate settlement densities with sufficient green and blue spaces 
to limit heat island effects and promote safer water management, an issue that 
disproportionately affects hygiene and health for women, girls, and people with 
disabilities.
•	
Integrate social and economic strategies into climate resilience planning, for 
example by promoting rainwater harvesting as a flood adaptation strategy and basic 
resource for women and girls, who are usually the primary water-fetchers.
•	
Promote urban agriculture to adapt to increasing extreme weather events such 
as drought, reducing the risk of food insecurity for low-income and female-headed 
households, among others.
•	
Improve solid waste management, especially in informal settlements, to reduce 
pollution, flooding, and toxic emissions in order to reduce the health, hygiene, and 
caregiving burdens for women, girls, and people with disabilities.
•	
Promote safe, convenient, and affordable public transport and active 
transportation, such as cycling and walking, to reduce greenhouse gas emissions 
and heat island effects while better catering to the complex transportation needs of 
women, girls, and sexual and gender minorities.
•	
Mix physical flood protection infrastructure and social resilience support, 
especially in informal settlements, where low-income, women-headed households tend 
to be located in the most affordable but flood-prone areas.
•	
Incorporate educational and skill-building opportunities for women and 
sexual and gender minorities of all ages and abilities into climate action plan 
implementation, for example by training them in green infrastructure construction 
techniques. This will improve social and economic inclusion as well as promoting 
ownership over new infrastructures, helping support maintenance and sustainability.

=== Página 63 ===
124
125
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
Disaster Risk 
Management
CASE STUDY
Despite their disproportionately gendered risks, disasters can sometimes create 
opportunities for women to play roles and enter spaces denied to them under 
normal circumstances. Following the 1999 Marmara Earthquake in Turkey, which 
killed more than 17,000 people, the nonprofit FWSS established Women and 
Children’s Centers to support women and increase the visibility of their crucial 
role in disaster recovery and reconstruction. Initially established in tents before 
moving to temporary housing settlements, the Centers provided a place for women 
to meet, learn skills, start individual and collective businesses, and access child 
care and information about reconstruction efforts.
Sources: Asia News Network, 2016; KEDV, 2019; Pournik et al., 2012
Disaster Risk Management (DRM) plans involve the development and application of 
disaster risk reduction and response strategies to prevent, reduce, manage, and cope 
with disaster risk in order to promote resilience, sustainability, and prosperity for all. A 
cross-sectoral, holistic approach is critical to evaluating and preparing for the complex 
nature of disaster risks — and this must be rooted in a commitment to social inclusion and 
gender equity. Evidence shows that when DRM efforts take into account the differences 
in socio-cultural roles, norms, and values around gender, the preparedness of the entire 
community is strengthened, and the number of injuries and deaths resulting from disaster 
can be significantly reduced. Moreover, women, girls, and sexual and gender minorities 
face significant additional risks such as increased gender-based violence following disaster, 
which must be incorporated into DRM planning.
RECOMMENDED PROCESS ACTIVITIES
Day in the Life
Walk Audit
Step Up
Star Diagram
Challenge and 
Solution
Design Your Own 
___
Public Space 
Checklist
ISSUE AREA WHEEL
Dis
ast
er 
Ris
k
     
     
Ma
na
ge
me
nt
    
   P
lan
s
Access
Mobility
Safety and Freedom from 
Health and Hygiene
Climate Resilience
Security of Tenure
Key Issue Area/s
Additional Issue Area/s
4.2.1  Planning Guidelines
DATA
BUY-IN
DESIGN

=== Página 64 ===
127
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design, 2020
126
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
4.2.1  Planning Guidelines
RESOURCES
Gender Action Plan: 2016-2021 (GFDRR) — 2016. 
Gender Equality and Women's Empowerment in Disaster Recovery (GFDRR) — 2018.
Gender-Inclusive Disaster Risk Management (Asian Development Bank) — 2014.
Making Women's Voices Count: Integrating Gender Issues in Disaster Risk 
Management (World Bank) — 2012.
•	
Ensure developmental considerations for gender equity are well-represented in the 
mitigation and preparedness phases of the disaster management cycle to enable 
long term and development-oriented recovery actions.
•	
Integrate gender equity and the empowerment of women, girls, and sexual and 
gender minorities of all ages and abilities in Recovery Frameworks, sector-based 
recovery plans, and monitoring and evaluation frameworks for equitable resource allocation 
and needs prioritization.
•	
Integrate reduction of gender-based violence into DRM policies and plans at all 
stages, including preparedness, post-disaster response, and recovery.
•	
Enable community-public partnerships for inclusive DRM to build technical capacity 
and political will for practical, collaborative initiatives, enabling DRM Agencies to partner 
with grassroots, women and minority-led community organizations.
•	
Establish specific safety standards in recovery shelters, such as adequate lighting and 
provisions for privacy, as well as standards for reporting GBV.
•	
Establish safe, accessible comunal spaces in recovery zones for women, girls, and 
sexual and gender minorities. These spaces can be a venue for private breastfeeding, 
participation in counseling sessions, connection with targeted disaster response service 
providers, and engagement in skill-building.
•	
Register land and housing built during recovery processes in women’s names or 
joint names to improve security of tenure, economic independence, safety, and autonomy.
•	
Develop criteria to disaggregate data in damage and loss assessments by 
gender, paying particular attention to the informal sector, to enable equitable restoration, 
replacement, and/or compensation of lost assets and damages for women and sexual and 
gender minorities.
•	
Facilitate both mixed and segregated communications and feedback forums in 
recovery that create a safe space for women, girls, and sexual and gender minorities of all 
ages and abilities to contribute to recovery processes.
•	
Channel funding through microfinance institutions and community-based savings 
and loan schemes to provide low-interest credit that will bolster the ability of women and 
sexual and gender minorities to prepare for and recover from disaster.
•	
Prioritize key amenities, services, and infrastructures used by women, girls, and 
sexual and gender minorities of all ages and abilities for reconstruction funding. As 
linchpins of a resilient community, it is particularly critical for women to have access to the 
services they need, such as childcare and sanitation, and for localized mobility infrastructure 
to reach these services.
•	
Develop culturally-appropriate early warning systems and education and awareness 
programs to explicitly target women and sexual and gender minorities of all ages and 
abilities in diverse cultural groups and different hazard contexts.

=== Página 65 ===
129
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
128
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design, 2020
Housing
CASE STUDY
70% of people over the age of 65 living alone in the UK are women. The 
Older Women’s Co-Housing group, a co-operative of fifty women in London, 
designed the UK’s first senior co-housing community called New Ground. 
Consisting of 25 housing units surrounding a walled garden with communal 
kitchens, meeting rooms, laundry, garden plots, and guest rooms, the project 
was designed in consultation with the women residents who now manage and 
maintain the building and gardens.This model not only meets the women’s 
housing needs but also their desire to give back to their community.
Sources: OWCH, 2017 and 2019; Community Led Housing London, 2019
Both a physical and social structure, housing functions at various spatial scales — 
home, neighborhood, city, region, and country. It is also a sector of the economy and an 
important category of land use in cities and in other settlements. The economic, social, 
and cultural right to “adequate” housing and shelter is recognized in some national 
constitutions, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, and the International Covenant 
on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights. However, women and sexual and gender 
minorities remain underserved physically, socially, and culturally by most current housing 
systems. To address this, it is essential to consider the supply and accessibility of social 
and infrastructural services alongside the creation of housing: creating livable spaces that 
improve quality of life, public health, and economic opportunity. As such, gender-inclusive 
urban planning, zoning, and infrastructure investments are fundamental to creating the 
conditions for gender-inclusive housing.
Project 
Guidelines

=== Página 66 ===
131
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design, 2020
130
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
RECOMMENDED PROCESS ACTIVITIES
Day in the Life
Walk Audit
Step Up
Star Diagram
Challenge and 
Solution
Design Your Own 
___
Public Space 
Checklist
ISSUE AREA WHEEL
    
    
   H
ou
sin
g
Access
Mobility
Safety and Freedom from 
Health and Hygiene
Climate Resilience
Security of Tenure
Key Issue Area/s
Additional Issue Area/s
4.2.2  Project Guidelines
DATA
BUY-IN
DESIGN

=== Página 67 ===
132
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
4.2.2  Project Guidelines
RESOURCES
ADA Standards for Accessible Design (US Department of Justice) — 2010.
Fair Housing Act Design Manual (US Housing and Urban Development Department) 
— 1996.
Gender Mainstreaming in Urban Planning and Urban Development (Vienna Ahead! 
City of Vienna) — 2013. 
International Building Code (International Code Council) — 2009.
•	
Provide a continuum of tenure types in housing developments, including customary 
forms of tenure, joint titles for men and women, leaseholds, condominiums, cooperatives, 
shared leaseholds and various forms of rental housing.
•	
Offer community-based savings and loan programs that allow access to small loans for 
incremental housing improvements.
•	
Design housing financing applications that do not discriminate against women 
and sexual and gender minorities, and allow for the eligibility of non-married and non-
heterosexual couples.
•	
Design housing with practical layouts that acknowledge the requirements of diverse 
homemakers and families. This could include such design layouts as wide hallways (90 
centimeters at minimum) to accommodate children’s toys, bikes, and wheelchairs, and the 
provision of adequate storage in each housing unit for flexible usage (a minimum of 1.5 square 
meters).
•	
Provide adequate lighting and ventilation in all units to promote health, quality of life, and 
full use of the space from early mornings to evenings.
•	
Design all units on the ground-floor to be accessible for people with disabilities, as well 
as the remainder of the building, to the extent possible. Provide ramps, elevators, handrails, 
and flooring materials that are safe to navigate on crutches, with a cane, or in a wheelchair. 
•	
Include fixtures and kitchen areas that meet accessibility standards and allow for 
multiple people to be within a kitchen area at once. Kitchens should have natural lighting and 
ventilation, and windows that open onto communal spaces to allow for supervision of children.
•	
Include lounges or living rooms that are flexible in nature to allow for flexible uses 
throughout different phases of family life. These spaces should be a minimum size of 12 
square meters.
•	
Design common spaces such as hallways and stairwells to be inviting and spacious, 
encouraging social encounters and promoting feelings of safety.
•	
Design housing complexes that are distinctive and easy to navigate to help people with 
cognitive disabilities to find their way safely.
•	
Plan and design housing developments with wrap-around services such as child care, 
market spaces, laundry facilities, and public spaces. 
•	
Provide ample play space within housing developments to promote child development 
and lighten caregiving burdens. For developments over 15 units, a 50 square meter 
playground or playroom should be provided; for developments over 50 units, a 500 square 
meter playground or playroom should be provided.
•	
Locate new housing within a 500 meter walking distance of a public transport station 
or stop to promote mobility and access to key services and opportunities. 
•	
Provide a wide range of housing typologies and layouts that take different life phases and 
situations into account equitably. These could include high-density multi-story development, 
two-family dwelling units, and single-family homes depending on the cultural context.  
•	
Enhance income generating opportunities within dwelling units by designing houses 
that allow for economic activities to take place in the dwelling and encouraging mixed-use 
zoning. 40% of floor space should be allocated for economic use within any neighborhood 
area.

=== Página 68 ===
134
135
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
Transportation and mobility infrastructure — including buses, subways, trains, cars, 
rickshaws, carshares, and bikeshares, but also sidewalks, crossings, and other infrastructure 
to support walking and cycling — are key to accessing jobs, markets, and services. 
Transport projects are consequently vital in improving the lives and livelihoods of people of 
all genders, ages, and abilities. While challenges in mobility affect everyone in a city, women 
and sexual and gender minorities of all ages and abilities often have substantially different 
transportation demands to those of cisgendered, heterosexual, and able-bodied men, due 
to differing gender roles and issues of safety, access, and often affordability. Addressing 
biases in how transportation demand is measured is critical to designing transportation and 
mobility projects that meet the complex, unique needs of all urban dwellers.
Public Transport, Mobility 
Infrastructure, and Road 
Safety Interventions
CASE STUDY
Gender-inclusive transportation projects can have the additional benefit of 
supporting climate action. Established in 2000, Bogotá’s bus rapid transit system 
TransMilenio has reduced emissions by over 1.6 million tons over seven years 
by providing an alternative mode to private cars and minibuses. The initiative 
not only reduced vehicle miles traveled by attracting new riders, but also created 
new job opportunities. Although TransMilenio did not initially address gender gaps 
between men and women, it eventually evolved to include women’s perspectives, 
resulting in improvements such as designated seats for women and children and 
separate entry doors for pregnant women and other vulnerable riders. 
RECOMMENDED PROCESS ACTIVITIES
Day in the Life
Walk Audit
Step Up
Star Diagram
Challenge and 
Solution
Design Your Own 
___
Public Space 
Checklist
ISSUE AREA WHEEL
    
Pu
blic
 Tr
ans
por
tat
ion
,    
    
     
 M
obi
lity
, +
 R
oa
d
    
    
    
    
    
 S
afe
ty
Access
Mobility
Safety and Freedom from 
Health and Hygiene
Climate Resilience
Security of Tenure
Key Issue Area/s
Additional Issue Area/s
4.2.2  Project Guidelines
DATA
BUY-IN
DESIGN

=== Página 69 ===
137
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design, 2020
136
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
4.2.2  Project Guidelines
RESOURCES
Approaches for Gender Responsive Urban Mobility: Module 7a (Sustainable Urban 
Transport Project) — 2018.
First Mile Last Mile Strategic Plan (Los Angeles Metro) — 2014.
Gender in Public Transportation: A Perspective of Women Users of Public 
Transportation (SADAQA) — 2018.
The Quest for Gender-Sensitive and Inclusive Transport Policies in Growing Asian Cities 
(University of Gothenburg) — 2016. 
Women and Transport in Indian Cities (Institute for Transportation and Development 
Policy) — 2017.
•	
Create a walking-friendly street network that is at the scale of the pedestrian and 
avoids the creation of megablocks. The median urban block length should fall between 
100 and 150 meters. Crossings should be provided every 90 meters on average, where 
possible. All crossings should be signalized in areas where the design speed is over 30 
kilometers per hour.
•	
Design a citywide cycling network that dedicates space to bicycle lanes, as 
appropriate to the zoning and cultural context. 80% of streets of 20 meters in width or 
wider should have dedicated cycling lanes that are at least 2 meters in width, or 2.5 
meters where rickshaws are one of the main modes of transportation.
•	
Implement bus and train schedules that meet the needs of all genders, and do not 
solely focus on traditional commute patterns or hours.
•	
Institute a stop request program that allows commuters to request a stop at any point 
along a public bus route during evening or nighttime hours, such as 9 pm to 5 am, to 
promote safety.
•	
Provide gender-segregated spaces, such as women-only buses or metro cars, 
on all modes of public transportation as a short-term improvement where context-
appropriate and if desired by local women and sexual and gender minorities. If gender-
segregated spaces are not feasible or desired, designate a minimum of 50% of seats for 
women, the elderly, and people with disabilities on buses and trains during peak hours.
•	
Institute public transportation fare structures that include flexible options, such 
as unlimited rides, so that fees do not disproportionately burden primary caregivers 
who tend to make more multiple short trips with transfers. Fare structure should be co-
designed with end users to ensure that transport does not cost more than 10% of the 
average household expenditures for the month.
•	
Design buses, trains, and infrastructure to account for different ages, abilities, 
body sizes, and needs, including for example: lower step-ups for buses, handrails at 
the appropriate heights, and dedicated storage space for strollers and baby carriages. 
In addition, consider the accessibility of stations — for example, stairs and turnstiles 
can be difficult to negotiate when accompanied by children or carrying bags.
•	
Design bus shelters to be adequately lit and visually transparent to allow for clear 
sight lines and promote safety.
•	
Improve bus and train scheduling so that wait times are less than 10 minutes to 
increase safety and convenience. Introduce real-time signage that shows expected 
transit arrival times.
•	
Build clean, secure, accessible toilets that include space for changing children’s 
diapers at bus stops, transportation terminals, and rail stations. Toilet facilities should 
be located either within the terminal, or within a 250 meter walking distance.
•	
Design vehicular street speeds to create a safe pedestrian environment. Speeds 
should be below 40 kilometers per hour in urban areas with exceptions made for specific 
corridors as necessary.

=== Página 70 ===
138
139
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
Streetscapes
Streets are the great connectors of neighborhoods and cities, and in many places they 
constitute the largest supply of public open space available (Moughtin, 2003). Design of 
streetscapes is dependent on the zoning and context of the street location, but a “complete 
street” will typically feature a dedicated bike lane, a dedicated bus lane, and a sidewalk, 
with safe separation buffers between bicyclists, pedestrians, and vehicular traffic. When 
carefully considered, streets can be the most active public spaces in a community; however 
they can also be spaces of trepidation, stress, and fear if designed in a way that is not 
inclusive to all genders, ages, abilities, and needs. Streetscape design with an eye on the 
needs of women, sexual and gender minorities, children, senior citizens, and people with 
disabilities is therefore fundamental to accommodating safe and efficient everyday patterns 
of life.
CASE STUDY
In the Khayelitsha area of Cape Town, South Africa, a street improvement project 
was undertaken to provide a safe, welcoming pedestrian route for women as part 
of the Violence Prevention through Urban Upgrading (VPUU) program. Through 
participatory design and development with local leadership and municipal 
departments, the project transformed a high-crime area into a sustainable, 
multifunctional public space. Women’s participation was key to project design 
and implementation, and women engaged in the project’s long-term sustainability 
through maintenance opportunities. Strategies such as tree planting, high-quality 
overhead lighting, and easy-to-maintain materials have led to a 30% increase in 
pedestrian activity. 
Source: Welle et al., 2015
RECOMMENDED PROCESS ACTIVITIES
Day in the Life
Walk Audit
Step Up
Star Diagram
Challenge and 
Solution
Design Your Own 
___
Public Space 
Checklist
ISSUE AREA WHEEL
 St
ree
tsc
ap
es
Access
Mobility
Safety and Freedom from 
Health and Hygiene
Climate Resilience
Security of Tenure
Key Issue Area/s
Additional Issue Area/s
4.2.2  Project Guidelines
DATA
BUY-IN
DESIGN

=== Página 71 ===
140
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
RESOURCES
First Mile Last Mile Strategic Plan (Los Angeles Metro) — 2014.
Global Street Design Guidelines (Global Designing Cities Initiative) — 2016.
Step 2025: Urban Mobility Plan (City of Vienna) — 2014.
Women and Transport in Indian Cities (Institute for Transportation and Development 
Policy) — 2017.
•	
Design for shared streets, sometimes referred to as “woonerfs”, to prioritize 
pedestrians over vehicular access. A shared street design usually employs techniques 
such as traffic calming, reduced speeds, and shared public space between all users. This 
strategy is particularly relevant for narrow streets or streets close to major destinations, 
and should include sidewalks or curbs and cap vehicular speeds at 15 kilometer/hour.
•	
Convert some streets to be pedestrian access only in areas near retail, schools, or 
other community destinations or gathering spaces. 
•	
Design raised street crossings in order to slow traffic and provide safer spaces for 
pedestrians. Raised crossings have been shown to reduce mid-block vehicular speeds 
by 10%.   
•	
Preserve well-defined lines of sight along the street, considering the placement of 
trees, signage, infrastructure, and construction scaffolding. All designs must take into 
account scenarios where plantings will be fully mature to ensure that sight lines are 
preserved in the future.
•	
Design sidewalks to accommodate families walking together with room for others 
to pass at a minimum of two meters in width in low-volume areas and a minimum of four 
meters in width in high volume areas. Two to three meters of unobstructed sidewalk should 
be maintained in all contexts, including in areas with street vendors, sidewalk cafes, or 
street furnishings. Two meters is also the minimum width to allow for two individuals in 
wheelchairs to comfortably pass one another.
•	
Design street medians to provide pedestrian refuge when crossing roads that are 
high-volume or four lanes or more in width. Medians should be a minimum of 1.5 meters 
in width. 
•	
Construct all sidewalks and walkways with materials that are easily traversed by 
a stroller or wheelchair, such as bricks, concrete pavers, concrete, or asphalt. Maintain 
these walkways in order to prevent cracking or buckling that could inhibit access.
•	
Install traffic calming strategies and crossing measures at all intersections, 
including zebra crossings, stop signs, or rectangular rapid flashing beacons. 
•	
Provide seating and shade in regular increments along the street to enhance 
pedestrian comfort and provide spaces for socialization and rest. 
•	
Design buffers between motorized and pedestrian pathways where possible, such 
as a planted swales or bollards. Curbs should be included on all sidewalks. 
•	
Include street lighting on all streets at regular increments, and avoid constructing 
pedestrian tunnels or underground walkways. For shopping areas, ensure 25 lux; for 
non-shopping areas, 30-40 lux is recommended. In typical commercial areas, light poles 
should be located every 9 meters on center.
•	
Provide clear street and building signage, listing street names for wayfinding purposes, 
to increase access and perceptions of safety. 
•	
Provide curb ramps to allow wheelchairs and strollers to safely navigate streets, at a 
slope that is designed for disability access. A flared curb ramp is the safest option, and 
should not exceed a slope of 1:12.
4.2.2  Project Guidelines

=== Página 72 ===
142
143
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
Public 
Space
Public spaces, including parks, plazas, squares, and gardens, but also temporary or 
informal spaces such as streets and sidewalks, are essential ingredients for a successful 
urban environment and healthy, connected, prosperous city. Providing opportunities for 
play, recreation, exercise, social and cultural exchange, and civic participation, public 
spaces aim to promote equity and coexistence for people of all genders, sexualities, ages, 
abilities, incomes, classes, ethnicities, races, and other social groups. However, public 
spaces can also become sites where numerous competing uses clash, and where diverse 
interests must be negotiated. Often, when essential services are badly designed or missing, 
women, girls, sexual and gender minorities, and people with disabilities bear the burden of 
the inaccessibility and insecurity that follows. Public space is not neutral, and hence their 
design can either facilitate or impede usage, appropriation, and safety for women, girls, and 
sexual and gender minorities.
In 2018, local stakeholders in Fittja, Sweden, decided to address the open drug 
dealing in the main square, which left girls and women feeling unsafe. In partnership 
with independent thinktank Global Utmaning, the municipality recruited local girls as 
“place experts” to identify problems and solutions alongside landowners, decision-
makers, and researchers. Using the computer game Minecraft, participants re-
designed the neighborhood to be compact, multifunctional, accessible, green, and 
supportive of diverse uses and social groups, which the girls felt were essential to 
safety. The project resulted in successful prototypes in Fittja square as well as a 
toolkit for replication, supporting Global Utmaning’s wider #UrbanGirlsMovement.
Source: Global Utmaning, 2019
CASE STUDY
RECOMMENDED PROCESS ACTIVITIES
Day in the Life
Walk Audit
Step Up
Star Diagram
Challenge and 
Solution
Design Your Own 
___
Public Space 
Checklist
ISSUE AREA WHEEL
    
    
Pu
bli
c S
pa
ce
Access
Mobility
Safety and Freedom from 
Health and Hygiene
Climate Resilience
Security of Tenure
Key Issue Area/s
Additional Issue Area/s
4.2.2  Project Guidelines
DATA
BUY-IN
DESIGN

=== Página 73 ===
145
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design, 2020
144
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
RESOURCES
Gender Issue Guide: Urban Planning and Design (UN-HABITAT) — 2012.
Global Public Space Toolkit: From Global Principles to Local Policies and Practice 
(UN-HABITAT) — 2015.
Safe Cities and Safe Public Spaces: Global Results Report (UN-Women) — 2017.
Safety and Public Space: Mapping Metropolitan Gender Policies (Metropolis) — 2018.
•	
Plan a network of public spaces that are accessible within a 250 meter walk of 
housing. These public spaces can include communal, semi-public, and public open 
spaces, and should be accessible by multiple modes of transit. Public spaces should be 
surrounded on three sides with streets or active building frontage to provide an additional 
level of public safety. 
•	
Design all public spaces to provide access to people with disabilities, children, and 
the elderly. This includes using solid ground materials that are easily traversed; ramps to 
negotiate any inclines; and accessible walkways to the majority of the site, particularly main 
amenities such as restrooms, playgrounds, sports courts, and gardens.
•	
Include an equitable number of amenities and mixed uses that are developed in 
response to community engagement and expressed needs. These facilities should be 
attractive and appealing to diverse user groups at different times of day and during different 
seasons, and include shaded resting areas and spaces that are protected from the weather.
•	
Include flexible spaces in the design that can be adapted to the needs and preferred 
activities and uses of all abilities and age groups.
•	
Consider striping sports fields for multiple sports that appeal to people of all genders 
so as to not signal a privileging of men and boys. 
•	
Include special-use areas for specific groups, such as playgrounds for small children 
within visual and vocal range of adult areas/apartments (if co-located with housing).
•	
Develop a “brand” or visual identity for the public space that is inclusive and 
welcoming to women, girls, and sexual and gender minorities of all ages and 
abilities. Ideally this visual identity would be designed with women, girls, and sexual and 
gender minorities from the immediate community, and  portrayed in the signage, art, and 
wayfinding of the site.
•	
Include site lighting and clear sight lines that are unimpeded by trees. Ensure adequate 
lighting of primary and secondary ways and open spaces, with clear, well-lit  access to 
exits. Trees should be pruned to have no foliage below 2.5 meters in height. Provide at 
least two main pedestrian through-paths across the space, and lighting levels that allow for 
recognition of an approaching person’s face from 10-15 meters away.
•	
Include clean, secure, accessible toilet facilities with adequate lighting and space 
for changing children’s diapers in all design projects and public parks. Provide adequate 
disposal options for menstrual products.
•	
Design passive space and shaded seating areas for women and other primary caregivers 
watching children, people with disabilities, and older individuals, particularly in areas where 
people are expected to wait for more than 15 minutes. Seating should be provided at least 
every 100 meters.
•	
Provide paid opportunities for women and sexual and gender minorities to be 
included in the maintenance and long-term upkeep of the space.
4.2.2  Project Guidelines

=== Página 74 ===
146
147
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
Basic Urban 
Services
After heavy snowstorms, municipal snowplows typically clear the largest, busiest 
roads before residential streets and sidewalks. Government officials in Karlskoga, 
Sweden realized this conventional approach privileges male travel patterns: work 
commutes to and from the center city. The City Council redirected its snowplows 
to clear sidewalks and residential streets — those used more heavily by women — 
before major roads. Pedestrian accidents after snow storms fell sharply, resulting 
in fewer emergency room visits and lowering healthcare costs to the city. One 
analysis found that it was equivalent to three times the cost of the winter road 
maintenance. 
Source: Perez, 2019
Basic urban services — including energy, communications, water and sanitation, and solid 
waste systems — are essential to supporting our fundamental human rights. When these 
fundamental services are costly, of poor quality, unavailable, or inaccessible, there are 
harmful impacts for all — but especially women, girls, sexual and gender minorities, and 
people with disabilities. Often, basic services are of particular importance for these groups 
due to physical needs, traditional caregiving roles and responsibilities, and gender-related 
barriers to access. Each stage of an infrastructural project design, implementation, and 
maintenance process should thus plan for and address the unique needs and priorities of 
all end users. To date, few countries have advanced an integrated gender and sustainable 
infrastructure agenda (OECD, 2019). The following sections provide both practical and 
strategic guidelines for planning and implementing gender-inclusive infrastructure and 
urban services. 
CASE STUDY

=== Página 75 ===
148
149
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
Energy, including the provision of electricity and safe cooking fuels, is an essential service. 
As urban settlements continue to grow, they create increased demand for accessible and 
affordable energy. However, women and sexual and gender minorities are more likely 
to experience a lack of access to energy throughout the developing world, with direct 
consequences for their economic livelihoods and human development. The energy-gender 
nexus has garnered growing attention, since there is evidence that improving gender 
equality and social inclusion is critical to maximizing the developmental impact of energy 
programs (World Bank, 2012). The unique ways in which women in particular use energy, 
as primary caregivers, mean that decision-making around energy must incorporate both 
their insights and priorities. (Angelou et al., 2019). 
Energy
CASE STUDY
Recent studies in India by the World Bank have seen marked effects on women's 
empowerment with the expansion of electricity and energy access. In Samad and 
Zhang’s (2019) study, empowerment is measured by women's decision-making 
ability, mobility, financial autonomy, reproductive freedom, and social participation. 
Using propensity score matching, the study found that extending electricity  to 
women enhances all measures of women's empowerment and is associated with 
an 11-percentage point increase in the overall empowerment index.
Source: Samad and Zhang, 2019
RECOMMENDED PROCESS ACTIVITIES
Day in the Life
Walk Audit
Step Up
Star Diagram
Challenge and 
Solution
Design Your Own 
___
Public Space 
Checklist
ISSUE AREA WHEEL
    
    
 E
ne
rg
y
Access
Mobility
Safety and Freedom from 
Health and Hygiene
Climate Resilience
Security of Tenure
Key Issue Area/s
Additional Issue Area/s
4.2.2  Project Guidelines
DATA
BUY-IN
DESIGN

=== Página 76 ===
151
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design, 2020
150
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
4.2.2  Project Guidelines
RESOURCES
Gender and Energy Role Playing (World Bank) — 2019.
Gender Equality and Sustainable Infrastructure (OECD Council) — 2019.
Gender Issue Guide: Gender Responsive Basic Services (UN-HABITAT) — 2013.
World Development Report 2012: Gender Equality and Development (World Bank) — 
2012.
•	
Proactively expand the provision of electricity to extend light hours at home and 
in public spaces for improved and safe undertaking of care work, income-generating 
tasks, and travel for women, girls, and sexual and gender minorities.
•	
Increase the national or city share of renewable energy sources to reduce 
household air pollution, avoid premature deaths, and limit carbon emissions.
•	
Expand and improve street and public space lighting to increase mobility for 
women, girls, and sexual and gender minorities and reduce the risk of gender-based 
violence after dark and in early mornings.
•	
Invest in reliable energy access for health facilities and backup energy sources 
to enhance health care provision, in particular maternal care. 
•	
Develop financing solutions that match users’ capacity to pay to make investments 
in energy assets and energy efficiency more achievable and equitable. 
•	
Promote and develop programs for women and sexual and gender minorities to 
rent energy appliances instead of purchasing to improve overall access to safer and 
more efficient equipment.
•	
Target female consumers to facilitate the adoption of energy efficiency solutions 
since women are usually the primary energy users in the household and are well-
positioned to manage family electricity use.
•	
Establish selection criteria for pro-poor targeting of households located within a 
certain distance of an existing distribution line or transformer.
•	
Employ women and sexual and gender minorities in energy service provision 
including sales, meter reading, billing, awareness-raising, and payment collection 
to build trust and expand service to underserved communities.
•	
Raise awareness of the impacts of fuelwood for cooking and reform building 
codes and design standards to encourage safe cooking fuels, adequate ventilation, 
and separation of cooking spaces.

=== Página 77 ===
152
153
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
The Baku Water Supply Project in Azerbaijan sought to improve the water supply 
system and reduce the water burden on women in communities where households 
typically received water for 6 hours a day, 14 days per month. The project created 
emergency, short-term improvements to restore water service and a framework 
for long-term recovery, incorporating a participatory assessment methodology. 
To increase women’s participation, the project engaged a women-led community 
NGO and engaged women in assessment, cost evaluation, and project design and 
implementation. 
Source: Wildeman,1995
Water, Sanitation, 
and Hygiene
Water, Sanitation, and Hygiene (WASH) are critical to public health and enable access 
to economic opportunity and full participation in public life. While infrastructure for safe 
drinking water has expanded in recent decades, as recently as 2015, 2.1 billion people still 
lacked access to safely-managed drinking water services and 4.5 billion lacked access to 
sanitation (WHO and UNICEF, 2015). ln most poor urban households, the burden of water 
collection rests on women and girls with a considerable cost in terms of time and energy, 
while limited access to WASH also increases risk of gender-based violence. Despite these 
gender issues, WASH design and delivery is often a male-dominated technical exercise. 
Women, girls, and sexual and gender minorities of all ages and abilities should be actively 
involved in every stage of WASH projects to improve success and sustainability (Postma 
et al., 2003).
CASE STUDY
RECOMMENDED PROCESS ACTIVITIES
Day in the Life
Walk Audit
Step Up
Star Diagram
Challenge and 
Solution
Design Your Own 
___
Public Space 
Checklist
ISSUE AREA WHEEL
     
Wa
ter
 +
 S
an
ita
tio
n
Access
Mobility
Safety and Freedom from 
Health and Hygiene
Climate Resilience
Security of Tenure
Key Issue Area/s
Additional Issue Area/s
4.2.2  Project Guidelines
DATA
BUY-IN
DESIGN

=== Página 78 ===
154
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
4.2.2  Project Guidelines
RESOURCES
Gender and Water: Mainstreaming Gender Equality in Water, Hygiene, and 
Sanitation Interventions (SDC) — 2005.
Gender Issue Guide: Gender Responsive Basic Services (UN-HABITAT) — 2013.
Guidelines on Gender Issues in Sanitation (Government of India) — 2017.
Toolkit for Mainstreaming Gender in Water Operations (International Bank for 
Reconstruction and Development) — 2016.
Women, Water, Sanitation, and Hygiene (SIDA) — 2015.
•	
Design clean, secure, accessible public WASH facilities with adequate lighting, safe 
and private entrances, secure doors, sufficient space for changing children’s diapers and 
navigating the facility in a wheelchair, and provisions for the hygiene needs of menstruating 
girls and women, especially those with disabilities.
•	
Provide toilet cubicles with a shelf, hooks, or a niche to keep clothing and menstrual 
products dry, and provide disposal bins with lids at a height that girls and women in wheelchairs 
can reach.
•	
Install water within no more than 500 meters of households, and safe sanitation 
facilities within a 2 minute walk of households in temporary urban settlements, if 
neither can be installed in individual households.
•	
Install WASH facilities at all schools separated by gender (this can include non-adjoining 
structures), and promote hygiene education and the destigmatization of menstruation in the 
classroom.
•	
Install sewerage and household connections (or decentralized sanitation with 
adequate governance structures) in urban upgrading projects to phase out unsafe and 
unsanitary WASH facilities and reduce gender-based violence. 
•	
Require comprehensive access to safe and reliable WASH facilities in any temporary 
or permanent resettlement or rehousing during urban upgrading to avoid long-term 
public health issues. In temporary urban settlements, women, girls, and sexual and gender 
minorities of all ages and abilities should be consulted about the physical placement and 
design of water points, showers and toilets.
•	
Co-design drainage and surface water management with water and sewerage 
infrastructure to manage waterborne disease and public health impacts and co-optimize 
public space and access. Drainage, flooding, water, sewerage, and public health are closely 
interlinked and, if unmanaged, can create everyday and incremental risks for urban residents, 
especially women, girls, and people with disabilities.
•	
Require an equitable tariff or payment structure for water access projects for low-
income and women-headed households. Investigate and implement the payment methods 
and maintenance structures that work best for these households.
•	
Stipulate a minimum of 50% female representation within WASH program staff 
and WASH committees and provide targeted support for women and sexual and gender 
minorities to assume leadership positions.
•	
Assess potential consultants based on the gender balance of proposed design teams 
and experience with gender components in infrastructure design and WASH programs in 
order to combat male dominance in water and sewerage engineering.
•	
Require comprehensive gender training, balanced job quotas, and the creation 
of gender sections in water and sewerage service providers as a prerequisite for 
partnership, with a particular focus on improving capacity and understanding among informal 
settlement departments. 
•	
Employ women, sexual and gender minorities, and women-led groups for long-
term operations work such as meter reading, billing, and payment collection.g There 
are specific tasks associated  with water management in which women and sexual and 
emeparticipation.
•	
Promote funding streams and scholarships for higher education programs for 
women and sexual and gender minorities in civil and water engineering, water resources 
management, and environmental science.

=== Página 79 ===
156
157
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
Roughly 15,000 people in Buenos Aires — many of them members of one of 
12 cooperatives — work as “Cartoneros” (waste-pickers), sorting through trash 
to collect recyclables. The Cartoneros were on the frontlines of the 2005 “Zero 
Garbage” law, when municipalities around Buenos Aires stopped accepting trash. 
Since then, more than 5,000 Cartoneros have been legally recognized and now 
receive a base salary, while the city has established 15 cleaner, safer processing 
plants and two Green Centers with childcare facilities. However, with the majority 
of Cartoneros falling outside this formal system, the cooperatives continue 
advocating for expanded recycling infrastructure.
Source: Balch, 2016
Solid Waste
Management
Interventions in solid waste management include sorting, recycling, and reuse of 
waste products to support environmental and public health, and can often create paid 
employment. However, solid waste management is one of the most challenging issues 
in urban development and has critical gender dimensions. Unequal gender roles place a 
disproportionate caregiving burden on women and girls, meaning preferences and attitudes 
around public health and community cleanliness can differ widely between genders. 
Although formal waste businesses are often male-led and dominated, and subject to the 
prevailing forces of competition and inequality in different societies Source: Wildeman,1995), 
informal systems of waste management are often women-led and working at the highest 
value (waste diversion) end of the waste hierarchy. Improving safety and employment 
opportunities in informal waste management are thus key strategies for building on existing 
networks and supporting the central role of women in this sector.
CASE STUDY
RECOMMENDED PROCESS ACTIVITIES
Day in the Life
Walk Audit
Step Up
Star Diagram
Challenge and 
Solution
Design Your Own 
___
Public Space 
Checklist
ISSUE AREA WHEEL
     
   S
oli
d W
ast
e
    
    
 M
an
ag
em
en
t
Access
Mobility
Safety and Freedom from 
Health and Hygiene
Climate Resilience
Security of Tenure
Key Issue Area/s
Additional Issue Area/s
4.2.2  Project Guidelines
DATA
BUY-IN
DESIGN

=== Página 80 ===
158
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
•	
Prioritize extending service provision to low-income and informal settlements to 
reduce public health impacts of solid waste on vulnerable groups.
•	
Involve community based organizations (CBOs), NGOs, and women-led 
microenterprises in primary collection services as a natural extension to the 
municipal service, rather than competition. This will also help destigmatize solid waste 
work for women.
•	
Create gender-inclusive employment policies for the integration of informal-sector 
services into formal-sector services through directly employing waste laborers or 
subcontracting to small enterprises.
•	
Assess the social, economic, land, and gender implications when introducing new 
waste technologies for sanitation, waste collection and disposal, and recycling. The 
effects of new technology on the chain of waste management activities can extend far 
beyond the specific activity for which the technology is designed, with potential disruption 
of substantial informal economies and wider social impacts.
•	
Codify a phased approach toward long-term standards for dump or landfill 
remediation, including processes for involving women’s waste enterprises, 
rather than requiring international standards from the first phase of projects. The level of 
environmental degradation and connected livelihoods around some dumps and landfills 
requires incremental adjustments to improve social and environmental conditions and 
ensure community buy-in. 
•	
Co-develop evaluation criteria with key stakeholders for the location of new waste 
facilities (landfills, combustion centers, recycling centers, and transfer stations) to take 
into account social and environmental impacts on nearby communities and vulnerable 
groups. Always consider extending the existing site(s) as one option. 
•	
Quantify employment and livelihood impacts of dump site remediation to avoid 
disrupting waste picker livelihoods through landfill alternatives or improvements. 
Remediation initiatives must be accompanied by engagement with waste pickers and be 
incorporated into future programs or alternative support mechanisms. 
•	
Provide protective gear that fits and works well for women within the waste sector 
to limit their exposure to toxic or hazardous waste materials. 
•	
Encourage small-scale, organic waste recycling based on animal feed or 
composting and raise awareness of the importance of waste separation. 
•	
Provide health education and healthcare/health insurance programs for women 
and sexual and gender minorities in the waste sector, particularly focusing on those 
in the informal economy given the high prevalence of injuries and illnesses.
•	
Institute childcare services in the waste sector that limit the exposure of children to 
waste products but do not hinder women’s and other primary caregivers’ ability to work 
within a landfill or dumpsite.
•	
Produce gender-specific analysis of the valuation of waste resources to account 
for specific users. Different impacts of chemical or biological waste on men and women 
should also be considered.
4.2.2  Project Guidelines
RESOURCES
From Theory to Action: Gender and Waste Recycling (WIEGO) — 2015.
Gender and Environment (Organization for Security and Co-Operation in Europe) — 
2009.
Social Assessment and Public Participation in Municipal Solid Waste Management 
(ECSSD) — 2014.

=== Página 81 ===
160
161
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
In 2017, over 85% of female respondents in Bogota, Colombia felt unsafe and 64% 
had experienced sexual harassment on public transportation. The City of Bogota 
started working with the SafetiPin app, which enables women to document where 
they feel safe or unsafe within the city. Nearly 18,000 entries have been made 
in the app, informing public awareness campaigns and transit staff training on 
women’s safety issues. In addition, plainclothes officers (of which over half are 
women) were created to visibly arrest men caught sexually harassing women on 
public transit.
Source: Connective Cities, 2018
Communications 
and ICT
The ongoing technological revolution and associated digital infrastructure, including internet, 
cellular networks, email communications, and e-commerce, are transforming the ways in 
which production is organized and information shared. Information and Communication 
Technologies (ICTs) can be a powerful catalyst for the economic, social, and political 
empowerment of oppressed groups, including women and sexual and gender minorities. 
However, existing power relations in society often determine who benefits from and shapes 
the content, development and use of ICTs. Women are less likely than men to have a 
smartphone and, alongside sexual and gender minorities, are underrepresented in the 
ICT sector (OECD, 2018). At the current pace, universal access to the internet will not 
be achieved before 2042 (ibid). There is also a growing need to address issues such as 
cyberbullying, sexual harassment, and other forms of violence against women, girls, and 
sexual and gender minorities facilitated by online services.
CASE STUDY
RECOMMENDED PROCESS ACTIVITIES
Day in the Life
Walk Audit
Step Up
Star Diagram
Challenge and 
Solution
Design Your Own 
___
Public Space 
Checklist
ISSUE AREA WHEEL
    
    
Co
mm
uni
cat
ion
s +
    
    
    
  IC
T
Access
Mobility
Safety and Freedom from 
Health and Hygiene
Climate Resilience
Security of Tenure
Key Issue Area/s
Additional Issue Area/s
4.2.2  Project Guidelines
DATA
BUY-IN
DESIGN

=== Página 82 ===
163
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design, 2020
162
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
•	
Use financial resources from universal service funds to support ICT access for 
women, girls, sexual and gender minorities, and people with disabilities, helping 
service providers offer low-cost home internet packages to low-income families and 
incentivize customers through discounts on mobile devices.
•	
Promote accessibility, affordability, and use of connected digital devices and 
broadband infrastructure, especially for low-income individuals, to promote gender 
equity. 
•	
Boost availability and promotion of e-banking and mobile money, especially to 
women and other disadvantaged groups.
•	
Promote competition, private investment, and independent and evidence-based 
regulation to extend coverage of digital services in underserved communities.
•	
Promote human rights and the rights of women, girls, and sexual and gender 
minorities of all ages and abilities as being relevant not only offline, but also online.
•	
Support advocacy networks protecting the rights (including digital rights) of 
women, girls, sexual and gender minorities, and people with disabilities to enable 
them to address gender and ICT policy at national, regional, and global levels.
•	
Sensitize policy makers, planners, and service providers to gender and ICT 
issues when considering new laws, plans, and services.
•	
Build awareness among users about the impact of online behavior on gender-based 
violence and intimidation. 
•	
Support the addition of gender-inclusive applications on top of the infrastructure 
layer to enhance safety and reporting of online and offline gender-based violence.  
•	
Support efforts to create content reflecting the voices of women, girls, and 
sexual and gender minorities of all ages and abilities through safe and secure 
online spaces.
•	
Expand the use of ICT among low-income and less literate women, girls, and 
sexual and gender minorities of all ages and abilities through the provision of 
computers at local schools, training in basic computing skills, and increased cellular 
network coverage. 
•	
Expand the definition and discussion of SMART cities to incorporate the goal and 
strategy of gender inclusion alongside technology and resilience.
•	
Develop online or video-based upskilling and tutorials targeted to women, girls, 
and sexual and gender minorities of all ages and abilities, enabling them to make 
better use of digital tools and extract more value from them.
4.2.2  Project Guidelines
RESOURCES
Bridging the Digital Gender Divide (OECD) — 2018.
Gender Equality and Sustainable Infrastructure (OECD Council) — 2019.
Gender Toolbox Brief: Gender and ICT (SIDA) — 2015.

=== Página 83 ===
165
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design, 2020
164
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
Activity Matrix
MP/IUDP
Metropolitan 
Development 
Plans
Urban Land 
Management
City Mobility/
Transportation 
Plans
Neighborhood 
Development 
Plan
Informal 
Neighborhood 
Upgrading Plans
Disaster Risk 
Management
Energy
City Climate 
Action Plans
Water and 
Sanitation
Solid Waste 
Management
Communications 
and ICT
Housing
Public 
Transport, 
Mobility and 
Road Safety 
Streetscapes
Public Space
PLANS
PROJECTS
Day in the 
Life
Walk  
Audit
Step Up
Star  
Diagram
Challenge  
and Solution
Design Your  
Own ___
DATA
BUY-IN
DESIGN
Public Space 
Checklist

=== Página 84 ===
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
167

=== Página 85 ===
169
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
168
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
The case studies included in this chapter demonstrate how cities, states, and countries around 
the world are approaching urban planning and design in a gender-inclusive way. They provide 
practical examples across a range of typologies, issues areas, and regions, detailing the local 
context, activities performed, and outcomes. Unfortunately, good examples of gender-inclusive 
projects are somewhat thin on the ground. Because of this, and the unique social, political, 
and environmental contexts in which these projects took place, these case studies should be 
understood to serve as inspiration, rather than as blueprints for replication. 
Gender-Inclusive  
Urban Planning and Design 
in Context: Case Studies
Kerala, India
WOMEN’S LAND OWNERSHIP AS A TOOL 
TO PREVENT DOMESTIC VIOLENCE
CONTEXT
Across India, intra-marital violence ranges between 20% and 50%. However, this is likely 
an underestimate due to women’s hesitation to report violence for fear of social stigma. 
Researchers have investigated the dynamics within marital relations that may lead to 
violence. For instance, a man married to a woman who is better employed than himself may 
physically abuse her to undermine her achievement, health, mobility, and social interaction. 
Within a sample of Indian women who experienced long-term physical abuse and did not 
own property, only 19% left the household. Almost all of these women went to live with their 
parents, and half ultimately returned to their abusive husbands.

=== Página 86 ===
170
171
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
Urban Land Management
5.0  Case Studies
ACTIVITIES
A study conducted by Agarwal and Panda (2007) examines domestic violence through 
its often-neglected connection to land tenure in both urban and rural communities 
of the Thiruvananthapuram District in Kerala, India (population 3.3 million). The 
Thiruvananthapuram District was selected for study because it was one of the few locations 
in India where a sufficient sample of property-owning women existed, due to traditional 
matrilineal inheritance practices.
Agarwal and Panda undertook an empirical study of married women aged 15-49 in the 
District to test whether the women’s ownership of property in their own names is associated 
with reduced levels of domestic violence, and therefore increased freedom. The study 
examined incidence of both physical and psychological intra-marital violence, including 
forced sex, that did not lead to death. Two previous surveys of 502 women living in both 
rural and urban environments carried out by Panda in 2000-2001 and 2004-2005 were 
used to provide answers to additional questions.
OUTCOMES
Agarwal and Panda’s study showed that women’s ownership of a house or land correlates 
with significantly reduced risk of both physical and psychological intra-marital violence. 
Ownership of property was found to provide women with enhanced physical security, self-
esteem, and the strength of a visible fallback position and tangible exit option (Agarwal and 
Panda, 2007, p359). As such, property ownership may provide an escape route if violence 
has occurred — with 71% of the women property owners who experienced long-term 
physical violence successfully leaving the home, compared to only 19% of respondents 
who did not own property — but also have the effect of deterring violence in the first place. 
While 49% of women who did not own property reported some form of long-term physical 
violence, only 18% of women who owned land, 10% who owned a house, and 7% who 
owned both reported such violence. In addition, women with property were found to have a 
greater say in household decision-making, particularly in relation to taking out loans, using 
contraceptives, and having sex with their husbands. 
This study illustrates the wide-reaching positive impacts of increased access to land tenure 
on women’s freedom and well-being. It shows that urban land management programs that 
focus on expanding titling options for women should be prioritized in urban land management 
efforts.  
  
Source: Agarwal and Panda (2007)
Barcelona, Spain
PARTICIPATORY MUNICIPAL PLANNING TO EXPAND RESOURCES AND 
INCREASE VISIBILITY FOR LGBT PEOPLE
CONTEXT
Despite legislative advances in LGBT rights in recent decades, homophobia and transphobia 
are still found in streets, workplaces, schools, and universities, preventing cities from becoming 
spaces of freedom and diversity that can be enjoyed fully by all citizens. However, many urban 
centers have sought to become spaces for acceptance. The city of Barcelona, Spain, established 
a Municipal Council for Lesbians, Gays, and Transsexual Men and Women (henceforth LGBT 
Municipal Council) in 2004 to serve as a participatory consultative body and provide the 
LGBT community with a stable forum to discuss and promote public policy, equal rights, social 
freedoms, and recognition. The Municipal Programme for LGBT People has worked since 
2007 to strengthen associations, raise the profile of the LGBT community throughout the civic 
spheres, and combat prejudice and discrimination.  

=== Página 87 ===
172
173
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
ACTIVITIES
Starting in 2008, the City of Barcelona sought to reinforce the LGBT Municipal Council’s 
goals by creating a Municipal Plan for Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender People 
to articulate and address issues raised by the LGBT community and incorporate the 
LGBT perspective throughout the municipal structure. The planning process was highly 
participatory, and incorporated many of the good practices for gender-inclusive planning 
covered in Chapter 4 of this handbook. 
The resulting plan included 228 strategic yet practical actions across 20 sections, covering 
a wide range of issues of importance to Barcelona’s LGBT community. The actions were 
broken down into (i) those already underway, (ii) short-term actions, (iii) medium-term 
actions, and (iv) long-term actions, to be carried out over a 5 year period (2010-2015). To 
ensure the feasibility of the plan, nothing that exceeded current municipal capacity was 
included. A 5-year implementation period starting in 2010 was established, complete with 
provisions for monitoring and evaluation to ensure successful application and coordination.
Several of the 228 recommended actions in the plan related to civic engagement and the 
built environment. For example, the plan proposed that municipal services generate new 
resources and recommended the establishment of dedicated LGBT Resource Centers 
to provide specialized services, centralized information, and advice to the community. 
To increase LGBT recognition and visibility, the plan called for the installation of various 
monuments and signage celebrating and commemorating important moments of LGBT 
history in central spaces in the city. Finally, to increase safety and perceptions of safety, and 
to promote respectful use and co-existence in public spaces frequented by LGBT people, 
the plan called for a Public Space monitoring program that ensures enforcement of rules 
against discriminatory conduct.
OUTCOMES
The Barcelona LGBT plan has been viewed as a good practice for LGBT policy and is now 
being replicated by other European municipalities, including Turin, Italy; the German cities 
of Berlin and Cologne; the Belgian cities of Ghent and Antwerp; and Dumfries and Galloway, 
Scotland. Overall, the plan is a good example of how to incorporate the perspectives of LGBT 
people into planning at a municipal scale, resulting in a good balance between addressing 
both practical and strategic needs. Though the plan covers multiple sectors and only begins 
to touch on elements of the built environment, its section on Social and Citizen Participation 
is a particularly good example of how to codify a channel for LGBT residents to become a 
part of the municipal dialogue.
Source: Municipality of Barcelona (2010), Grigolo (2007)
Municipal Planning
5.0  Case Studies
Kerala, India
CENTERING WOMEN’S PRIORITIES AND CAPACITY-BUILDING  
TO SUPPORT SUSTAINABLE URBAN DEVELOPMENT
CONTEXT
Kerala, a state on the southwestern coast of India that includes the cities of Kochi, Kollam, 
Kozhikode, Thiruvananthapuram, and Thrissur, is home to over 33 million people. The region 
faces significant challenges around gendered division of labor, with women and girls shouldering 
the majority of the burden for domestic tasks. Poor infrastructure complicates their ability to carry 
out responsibilities relating to water, drainage, health, sanitation, and waste disposal. There is little 
institutional capacity to implement gender equality strategies, given that the general awareness 
of gender issues at the local level is low, and skills to develop concrete solutions are lacking. Men 
continue to dominate the construction industry, and women are discriminated against in terms 
of wages and working conditions. Women often find it difficult to engage in community initiatives 
due to lack of time, gender stereotypes, and lack of confidence. 

=== Página 88 ===
174
175
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
ACTIVITIES
In 2005, the Local Self Government of Kerala launched the Kerala Sustainable Urban 
Development Project (KSUDP) to improve the urban environment, economy, and living 
conditions of residents of Kochi, Kollam, Kozhikode, Thiruvananthapuram, and Thrissur. It 
aimed to improve, expand, and strengthen urban infrastructure and services, and to expand 
livelihoods across the five cities. 
While the project as a whole sought to improve living conditions and opportunity for women 
and men, the project team developed a Gender Action Plan (GAP) to promote women’s 
participation, include their perspectives throughout the project, and ensure equitable 
outcomes. The GAP not only enabled the participation of women within their communities, 
but also placed women in office staff positions and as elected representatives. The belief 
was that by providing women with greater economic opportunities through poverty reduction 
programs and skill development training, and by increasing the efficiency of household tasks 
through improved infrastructure, their overall ability to participate in development would 
increase. Special assistance and compensation were given to ensure vulnerable groups such 
as women-headed households, people with disabilities, and those with illness in the family 
could participate. The cumulative effect of these actions ensured that there was significant 
participation by women in the KSUDP.
OUTCOMES
Urban infrastructure improvements prioritized by women— including Water, Sanitation and 
Hygiene (WASH), solid waste management, and road transportation— have benefited residents 
across the five focus cities, and especially women and girls. Improved access to safe water and 
sanitation facilities has reduced the workloads of women and girls and made family hygiene 
practices healthier, while road improvements have increased mobility and safety. Specific 
achievements include the following:
•	
52.35 kilometers of drains were reconstructed
•	
62 early childhood education centers were renovated
•	
32 biogas plants were established to process household waste
•	
2,480 low-cost household toilets were constructed
In addition, the project offered vocational training in a number of areas to support women’s 
business initiatives, providing women and men alike with more opportunities for employment 
and to initiate their own income-generating activities. 
•	
83 workshops were held to develop participatory plans for poverty reduction across the five 
cities, and 84% of the 2,823 participants were women
•	
63% of participants in planning and implementation of the Community Infrastructure Fund 
(CIF) were women, with 82% of CIF contracts completed as of 2015
•	
107 training programs for elected officials were implemented across the five cities, which 
included 3,947 participants, 89% of whom were women 
In all, women’s participation in the KSUDP contributed to a more equitable built environment. 
Municipal Planning
5.0  Case Studies
It also enhanced their self-esteem and nurtured their leadership abilities, not only within the 
community but also within their households. 
Nonetheless, more could have been done to address gender biases and ensure lasting shifts 
in attitudes and opportunities for women. The final project report noted that the GAP was not 
synchronized with the design and moniotoring framework nor extended across all activities 
within the project, meaning gender was not treated as a cross-cutting, central issue. A more 
integrated approach may have led to more sustained impact on gender relations.
Source: Asian Development Bank (2015a, 2018) 
Municipal Planning
5.0  Case Studies

=== Página 89 ===
176
177
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
Azad Kashmir, Pakistan
PROMOTING WOMEN’S LAND OWNERSHIP AND  
REPRESENTATION FOLLOWING DISASTER
CONTEXT
On the morning of October 8, 2005, a magnitude 7.6 earthquake hit the Pakistan-administered 
Azad Kashmir region, causing severe damage and destroying entire towns and villages. 
Over 85,000 people died, more than 100,000 were injured, and 3.5 million people were 
left homeless and living in temporary shelters. Overnight, thousands of women were left 
widowed while many men who had been their families’ primary income-providers were left 
unable to work. Affected women suddenly needed to earn enough money to support their 
entire households, while often also caring for newly-disabled family members of all ages, 
all in a socially conservative society where women traditionally have limited education and 
mobility.
Significant recovery efforts in Azad Jammu, Kashmir, and the North-West Frontier 
Province funded by the Asian Development Bank (ADB) were undertaken, starting with 
the reconstruction of roads and other community infrastructure. Though these initial efforts 
were initially considered successful, they were not gender-equitable, with most resources 
and assistance reaching men. 
As such, ADB sought to give further recovery efforts more explicit gender equity goals to 
aid the most vulnerable victims of the disaster — including the 27% of households that were 
headed by women, many of them as a direct result of the earthquake. 
ACTIVITIES
Starting in 2007, the Earthquake-Displaced People Livelihood Assistance Restoration 
Program channelled funds through the government’s Earthquake Reconstruction and Relief 
Agency (ERRA) to be allocated to individual households based on the extent of damage 
caused to homes. The program took a bottom-up, owner-driven implementation approach 
for procuring needed materials and self-building houses using the ERRA’s seismically 
compliant housing designs.
In an effort to confront the shortfalls of previous recovery projects, the program included a 
Gender Vulnerability Action Plan (GVAP) that set the following objectives:
•	
To improve women’s access to rights and entitlements of land and home ownership. All 
new houses were to be registered under the names of both husband and wife.
•	
To provide equitable access for women and other vulnerable groups to housing, 
reconstruction and housing-related services, including housing grants. Women were to 
have 50% representation in Village Reconstruction Committees.
•	
To include gender equity targets and provision for training. Women were to make up 
50% of participants trained in housing reconstruction and other non-traditional skills.
•	
To help women establish legal ownership of property through legal services.
OUTCOMES
The program enabled 320,000 households to rebuild their homes, including 55,000 women-
headed households. More than 780,000 people were trained by the ERRA in seismic-
compliant building design and construction techniques. Women made up 30% of the 
social mobilization teams that reached out to affected communities with information and 
assistance. In a deeply conservative region where land titles are traditionally held almost 
exclusively by men, the emphasis on helping women and other vulnerable groups through 
legal aid, mobile registration service, and information dissemination meant 16% of the newly 
built houses are owned by women-headed households. As a result of holding land titles and 
owning homes, these women enjoy a higher status in their communities.
However, the rapid time frame, large scale, intricacies of the bottom-up approach, and 
failure to systematically implement and fully comply with the GVAP made it challenging for 
ERRA to fully achieve the program’s gender objectives. The results outlined above fell well 
below the expectations and performance indicators set at the onset of the program. The 
following lessons can be taken from this project: 
Disaster Risk Management
5.0  Case Studies

=== Página 90 ===
178
179
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
•	
Gender-specific goals alone are not enough if their implementation and compliance are 
not ensured, or are not monitored and evaluated effectively.
•	
Though a gender-specific plan is an important start, a plan alone is not enough to 
ensure gender equity; additional time and resources need to be allocated to ensure the 
successful implementation of gender-specific goals (See Core Commitments in Chapter 
3).
Source: Asian Development Bank (2017), Hutchison (2015)
Disaster Risk Management
5.0  Case Studies
Vienna, Austria
MAINSTREAMING GENDER ACROSS PLANNING  
EFFORTS TO CREATE A GENDER-INCLUSIVE CITY
CONTEXT
Vienna, the capital of Austria, has about 1.9 million inhabitants and dynamic urban growth. 
Consistently ranked as one of the world’s most livable cities thanks to its efficient and affordable 
public transport system, solid stock of social and nonprofit-oriented housing, and socially-
aware approach to urban planning, the City of Vienna has addressed gaps between males 
and females in its public policy and urban planning since the 1990’s. Rules and regulations 
have been created to ensure equal access to city resources, and a high-level unit with three 
feminist gender planning experts, in place for 11 years, has coordinated more than 60 pilot 
projects in many different sectors. 

=== Página 91 ===
180
181
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
ACTIVITIES
Public Transport and Pedestrian Issues
Alongside metro line extensions focusing on improved station design, the city has centered 
issues of pedestrian access and safety, particularly for women. Following night walks in 
an inner district by the Local Women’s Commission to identify spaces of anxiety, improved 
lighting, wider sidewalks, and ramps to improve access for people with strollers and 
wheelchairs were implemented in a pilot process over a period of four years. Awareness 
of pedestrians has risen significantly in the City’s road construction unit, with pedestrian 
challenges now considered as important as those faced by drivers — a critical shift in 
thinking reinforced by the fact that also every public transport ride necessitates two 
additional pedestrian ways.
Public Space
A study by Vienna’s Women’s Office found that the number of girls using the city’s parks 
declined rapidly once they reached the age of 9-10 years. In response, the city revamped 
its parks guidelines based on the evaluation of six pilot projects, four of them with the active 
participation of girls. New recreation facilities such as volleyball and badminton courts and 
cosy seating areas offered more possibilities for users and made parks more appealing for 
women and girls; while extra footpaths, benches, trees, and shade improved mobility and 
access and provided opportunities for rest.
Housing
The City of Vienna commissioned a design competition for eight female architects in 
1993 for an apartment complex designed by women, known as Frauen-Werk-Stadt, or 
Women-Work-City. In the end, four of the female architects designed the 360 units. Design 
criteria for the competition included provisions such as practical layouts; flexible spaces to 
accommodate different phases in life; inviting and spacious stairwells and entrance areas 
that prioritize social encounters and reduce feelings of fear; highly-visible recreation spaces; 
large, naturally-lit kitchens; and seamless linkages between interior and exterior spaces. 
Eight female architects applied, with four of them designing 360 units in the complex. The 
development features flexible units that can be adapted for different life phases and family 
arrangements; common roof terraces and open spaces for recreation; and an on-site 
childcare facility, pharmacy, and doctor’s office. To further support family life and reduce 
care work, the development is located next to a supermarket and tram stop, and in close 
walking distance of a primary school.
Public Buildings
Following two gender-inclusive project pilots, the City released a new “quality criteria” 
catalogue. Planning competitions for educational buildings now include gender criteria and 
a strong focus on open spaces and playgrounds.
Integrated Urban Development Planning
5.0  Case Studies
Improving Capacity and Awareness
The City of Vienna’s gender planning activities have been branded under the name “Fair 
Shared City” to emphasize the equality aspect. A Fairness Check has been developed to 
ensure different users groups’ needs are addressed systematically, and gender experts 
installed on competition review panels. Numerous manuals, guidelines, and gender trainings 
have built capacity and awareness within the planning administration, while measures such 
as renaming streets to feature female names and showing fathers holding babies on 50% of 
public transit signage have helped address cultural gender gaps.
OUTCOMES
The systematic consideration of gender gaps by the planning departments responsible for 
design and planning issues in the City of Vienna contributed significantly to the high quality 
of life and, as a result, serves as one of the most successful examples of gender inclusion 
to cities around the world.
Source: City of Vienna
Integrated Urban Development Planning
5.0  Case Studies

=== Página 92 ===
182
183
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
Mexico City, Mexico
PROVIDING PRACTICAL, SHORT-TERM TRANSPORTATION  
SOLUTIONS TO ADDRESS URGENT GENDER ISSUES
CONTEXT
Women face harassment on a daily basis in Mexico City’s transit system, which transports 
four million people each day. A 2008 study by the National Board for the Prevention of 
Discrimination found that 90% of Mexico City’s female transit riders reported having being 
sexually harassed while traveling, including by groping, lascivious looks, and explicit 
comments about their bodies. Exacerbating this problem is the fact that many women in 
Mexico City do not trust or feel safe around the police, leading to the underreporting of 
transit-related sexual harassment and violence. Violence on public transit leaves women 
afraid to travel, often preventing them from accessing important social, educational, and 
economic opportunities.
ACTIVITIES
“Pink Transportation”— known in Spanish as “Transporte Rosa” and “Vagones Rosa” — is 
a program that dedicates some public transport exclusively to women, children under 12, 
and elders. The program began in 2000, when Mexico City’s Department of Transportation 
designated two cars within each metro train exclusively for women, as well as establishing 
women-only bus lines and sections of buses. In 2008, women-only transportation options 
were literally turned pink, transforming the program into a visual campaign and illuminating 
the problem of violence against women on transit. The department also expanded the 
number of women-only buses from fewer than 30 to almost 100 and branded them the 
“Atena Line”, after the Greek goddess Athena. Each bubblegum pink bus sports a portrait 
of a woman that played a pivotal role in Mexico’s history on its side. Starting in 2008, the 
department also implemented a program called “Viajemos Seguras” (Let’s travel safely) to 
help women report sexual harassment and violence in public transportation. Five offices 
staffed exclusively by women were launched in the most crowded metro stations in the city, 
along with a 24-hour hotline. These provide women with a safe place to report crime and 
challenge the perception that women themselves are solely responsible for their own safety. 
Finally, in 2010, Mexico City launched a pink taxi program consisting of bubblegum pink 
cabs that are driven by women and stop exclusively for women.
OUTCOMES
The Pink Transportation program has had mixed results. Women overwhelmingly choose 
to use Pink Transportation options when they have them, and take a prominent role in 
protecting these spaces. However, while women report feeling more safe or comfortable 
using Pink Transportation options, 70% still report feeling unsafe using public transportation 
overall. Pink buses comprise only about 10% of the city’s fleet, running on 23 out of 91 formal 
bus routes. Gender-segregated transportation as a whole has proven contentious among 
feminists and transit advocates. It is a practical approach that addresses the immediate 
issue of violence against women on public transit, but does little to strategically confront the 
underlying structural issues that cause it, such as deeper patriarchal societal tendencies or 
rape culture. Moreover, Pink Transportation fails to address the needs of sexual and gender 
minorities and can encourage discrimination and harassment against these groups. 
Nonetheless, given the severe and urgent impacts of violence against women in terms 
of opportunity, freedom, and agency, segregated transport does have a role to play in 
catalyzing wider conversations and change around gender issues. This is particularly 
powerful when paired with more strategic approaches, such as changing laws and policies, 
providing support for victims of violence, and changing broader social narratives around 
gender.
Source: Dunckel-Graglia (2013); Linthicum (2016) 
Public Transport, Mobility Infrastructure, and Road Safety Interventions
5.0  Case Studies

=== Página 93 ===
184
185
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
HAZME EL PARO: INCREASING WOMEN’S SAFE ACCESS  
TO ECONOMIC OPPORTUNITIES IN MEXICAN CITIES
In Mexico City, the World Bank designed, implemented, and evaluated a project to prevent and 
respond to sexual harassment on public transport. The project aimed to increase women’s 
safety by providing the transport community with a package of solutions to intervene in 
cases of sexual harassment by becoming agents of change, while contributing to change 
social norms. By developing a Response Protocol and training bus drivers and police, 
the intervention improved the private operator and government agency’s awareness and 
capacity to respond to sexual harassment cases. Additionally, this intervention developed a 
marketing campaign to challenge social norms around the belief that “women are asking for 
it,” as well as a smartphone application to facilitate reporting and referral to services. This 
intervention serves as a good example of a project that worked to change the perception 
of transport users about violence against women. The preliminary evaluation of shows an 
increase of awareness regarding the issue of sexual harassment and a drop in perception 
that women were “asking” to be harassed. Moreover, in the 14 weeks of the pilot, 62 geo-
located reports were made.
Public Transport, Mobility Infrastructure, and Road Safety Interventions
5.0  Case Studies
Umeå, Sweden
IMPROVING PERCEPTIONS OF SAFETY  
THROUGH INTELLIGENT STREETSCAPE DESIGN
CONTEXT
Umeå, the largest city in northern Sweden, is home to 120,000 residents. Like many cities 
it was built to reflect the perspectives and needs of male urban planners, designers, and 
developers. Over the last 40 years, the City of Umeå has worked to redesign the built 
environment to promote gender equality, with the overarching goal of ensuring that both 
women and men have equal power in both public and private life. In 1989, a strategic body 
was established to oversee these gender-inclusive efforts and projects. 
Women’s safety and comfort in Umeå’s public spaces became a particular point of attention 
in the late 1990’s and early 2000’s following a series of violent assaults by a serial rapist 

=== Página 94 ===
186
187
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
known as the “Haga Man”. In the wake of these assaults and the public discussion that 
followed, city leaders faced increased pressure to implement safety measures focused 
specifically on women. 
ACTIVITIES
The “Lev” (Live) tunnel demonstrates the Umeå municipality’s shift toward physical planning 
and design with a gender-inclusive perspective. Opened in 2012, the Lev tunnel is a nearly 
80 meter-long pedestrian and bicycle passage that connects the city center to the Haga 
neighborhood and aims to provide passage for women and men at all times, without fear or 
safety concerns. As part of the project, the municipality implemented a planning and design 
process that highlighted gender gaps between men and women, as well as conducted 
gender equality workshops with those involved in the design and construction of the tunnel. 
The resulting design features safety considerations such as wide entrances to allow 
passage for people walking in groups and women or men with children and strollers; 
gradual gradients and rounded corners to enhance sight lines and improve perceptions 
of safety; and ample natural lighting, maximum transparency, and welcoming artwork and 
soundscapes to create a tranquil atmosphere that feels welcoming, rather than threatening. 
OUTCOMES
Largely due to its innovative design, the Lev tunnel has become one of the city’s main 
attractions. The active usage of the tunnel further supports feelings of safety for its users. 
The municipality acknowledges that although the tunnel itself cannot end violence against 
women, it has created an opportunity to raise awareness on issues of gender, safety, and 
the causes and facilitators of violence.
 
Sources: City of Umeå (2019), Sandberg and Rönnblom (2016), Sveriges Arkitekter (2014), 
URBACT (2018)
Streetscapes
5.0  Case Studies
Mendoza, Argentina
PARTICIPATORY DESIGN TO CREATE A PUBLIC SPACE  
THAT SERVES ALL GENDERS EQUITABLY
CONTEXT
At the edge of the city of Mendoza, Argentina, lies the informal settlement, or barrio, of 
La Favorita. With over 10,000 residents, La Favorita is home to almost 10% of the city’s 
population and dates back to the 1940’s, when people fleeing political oppression in Chile, 
Peru, and Bolivia began to settle there. In part due to this history, La Favorita is well-
organized and is home to a variety of local organizations and unions. 
Four phases of World Bank-funded upgrades have already taken place in some zones of 
La Favorita, including the paving of roads and provision of basic infrastructure and lighting. 
The plaza at the center of the barrio, Plaza Aliar, also received basic improvements, with 

=== Página 95 ===
188
189
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
paths, planting, lights, trash cans, water fountains, and playground equipment added over 
the years. However, the plaza remains largely underused. Its expansiveness leaves women 
and sexual and gender minorities feeling unsafe, uncomfortable, and exposed — even 
when doing exercise classes with others in the plaza. This is exacerbated by men who 
dominate the space and often drink and do drugs there. On the rough soccer field on the 
western end of the plaza, games for boys and men tend to be prioritized. Residents feel the 
small playground on the eastern edge of the plaza is too close to traffic, and report multiple 
incidents of children running into traffic and being hit.
ACTIVITIES
In 2018, Kounkuey Design Initiative (KDI) worked with the Municipality of Mendoza, the 
Argentine Ministry of Interior, Public Works, and Housing, and students from Harvard’s 
Graduate School of Design (GSD) to assess the needs of La Favorita’s residents through 
a gendered lens and provide recommendations for the gender-inclusive redesign of Plaza 
Aliar. The project envisioned people of all genders playing an equal role in determining and 
shaping their community in order to promote equity of self-determined time, safety, social 
opportunity, and social capital.
The team worked directly with women of La Favorita to evaluate Plaza Aliar and imagine 
solutions to their challenges through changes in the public realm. The participatory 
methodology included a series of activities focused on developing a shared understanding of 
gender issues in urban planning; examining the barrio’s public spaces; identifying challenges 
faced in the urban environment and potential solutions; and collectively prioritizing those 
potential solutions. Once the needs, challenges, and initial visions were established, the 
project team worked with women to create six proposed plans for the redevelopment of 
Plaza Aliar that were presented back to the community for feedback and voting. 
The plan that the women chose envisions Plaza Alair as a multifunctional plaza comprised 
of individual “rooms” linked together with cohesive design and flow. It ties directly into its 
surroundings, building on existing assets such as a municipal resource center, and serves 
recreational, social, health, literacy, economic, cultural, political, and transportation needs 
through a variety of amenities, including:
•	
A small central plaza surrounded by active uses throughout the day to provide “eyes on 
the space” and enhance safety for women
•	
A multiuse structure to serve as an open-air community center for various uses, including 
Zumba classes that are less exposed for the women’s comfort
•	
A field hockey pitch striped for a variety of uses in addition to soccer
•	
A playground surrounded by raised vantage seating for women and other caregivers to 
watch their kids and a community market where women can vend
•	
A protected bus shelter where women can wait for the bus safely
•	
An amphitheater with stepped seating for community events
•	
A library grove across from the popular adjacent library to provide a variety of uses
Public Space
5.0  Case Studies
Together, these features provide for women’s safety, social opportunity, and capital; and 
create gender-inclusive spaces for women to spend their self-determined time.
 
OUTCOMES
The Municipality of Mendoza is now preparing for construction of the plaza, with 
groundbreaking set to take place in 2020. A key achievement of the project is that the 
selected plan will put into place recommendations crafted directly by and for the women of 
La Favorita. In addition, the project was successful in creating buy-in among government 
partners around the importance of a gender-inclusive process and product. As a result of this 
project, municipal partners have decided to implement similar gender-inclusive participatory 
processes in future planning and design projects, and the Argentine government will 
incorporate these practices into its national upgrading protocol.
Sources: Bennett and Stack (2018), Kounkuey Design Initiative (2018)
Public Space
5.0  Case Studies

=== Página 96 ===
190
191
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
CONTEXT
In the informal settlements of Bhopal, Gwalior, Indore, and Jabalpur in the Indian state of 
Madhya Pradesh, the overwhelming majority of households lack water supply and sanitation 
facilities. Women living in these settlements suffer most from poor access to quality water and 
sanitation facilities, as they are usually responsible for fetching and managing household water 
supplies to fulfill duties such as cooking and maintaining personal and household hygiene. This 
disproportionate allocation of responsibilities, coupled with inadequate facilities that require 
women to travel long distances to collect water, forces women to spend a significant proportion 
of their time on household-related work. Moreover, the lack of sanitation facilities has led to high 
rates of open defecation, with specific health and safety concerns for women and girls who have 
to wait until after dark to relieve themselves — affecting their internal health and making them 
vulnerable to violence. 
 
ACTIVITIES
In 2003, the Government of Madhya Pradesh’s Department of Urban Administration and 
Madhya Pradesh, India
IMPROVING INFRASTRUCTURE TO REDUCE WOMEN'S CAREGIVING  
AND FAMILY HYGIENE BURDENS
Development implemented the Urban Water Supply and Environmental Improvement 
Project (or Project UDAY). The project aimed to intentionally improve the living conditions 
and economic opportunities of women by (i) reducing the amount of effort and time spent 
fetching and storing water; (ii) improving drainage and garbage collection; (iii) improving 
access to toilets; and (iv) hiring female workers in the building and maintenance of the 
project. Project UDAY would achieve this by improving urban water supply and wastewater 
collection and treatment systems.
Some of the project’s gender-inclusive elements included:
•	
An evidence-based gender mainstreaming strategy using results from a gender 
assessment of all four project cities
•	
A Gender Action Plan (GAP), including elements such as targets for female participation 
in project activities and decision-making, and gender awareness modules included in all 
project-related trainings
•	
A gender field manual to integrate gender considerations into the Municipal Action Plan 
for Poverty Reduction processes
•	
Community mobilizations focused on women to ensure their proportionate representation 
in Community Group Committees, which guided and informed all projects
Specific design elements incorporated the safety concerns of women and girls into the built 
interventions. For example, designs for new community toilets addressed previous faulty 
design issues, poor placement placement in locations that left women and girls vulnerable to 
violence, and inadequate maintenance. In addition, women expressed a need for places for 
public participation, cultural programs, marriages, events, and cultural exchange. Because 
of this, original plans that were solely meant to provide community toilets were expanded to 
include community halls for such activities to take place.  
 
OUTCOMES
Over 5.6 million people benefited from improved water supply, half a million benefited from 
the upgraded wastewater management system, and 4.7 million benefited from an improved 
solid waste management system. Water supply was extended into informal settlements, 
increasing access to water. This new access improved health and safety for women by 
enabling them to bathe and wash clothes more frequently and in privacy. The improved 
availability of water also enabled residents to construct in-home toilets, and 25 community 
toilets were renovated where in-home space was limited, giving access to 4,000 households. 
Women and men alike experienced a reduction in workloads due to improved access 
to convenient and safe water services. In addition, the project successfully increased 
participation of women in leadership and decision-making in the water and sanitation sector: 
of the 760 members who participated in the Community Group Committees (CGC’s), 73% 
of them were women.
 
Sources: UN-HABITAT (2006), Asian Development Bank (2015b), Asian Development Bank 
(2011) 
Water, Sanitation, Hygiene
5.0  Case Studies

=== Página 97 ===
192
193
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
CONTEXT
The state of Ceará is home to Fortaleza, Brazil’s fifth largest city. In its hard-to-access, low-
income settlements, lack of formal waste collection leads to the improper disposal of waste, often 
in the streets. This poses serious health concerns for residents, with the accumulation of waste 
in the streets, accompanied by high temperatures and stagnant water during rainy seasons, 
increasing the risk of disease outbreaks. This risk is further heightened when household waste 
mixes with wastewater. 
Women in the informal settlements of Fortaleza suffer disproportionately from the lack of waste 
Fortaleza, Brazil
IMPROVING WOMEN’S HEALTH AND LIVELIHOODS THROUGH  
WASTE DISPOSAL AND ELECTRICITY SERVICE DISCOUNTS
collection infrastructure due to gendered societal roles. Women tend to carry out waste disposal 
as part of their unpaid and time-consuming household-related duties, and also make up 30% 
of those across Brazil who declare waste collecting as their main “occupation” - possibly a 
conservative figure since many may consider it part of their caregiving duties. This exposure to 
waste puts women at greater risk of contracting disease while decreasing the amount of time 
they can spend accessing paid employment, education, and services. 
ACTIVITIES
Coelce, a Brazilian electricity company, launched a pilot program in 2007 in four low-income 
communities in the city of Fortaleza. Though not designed specifically to target women, the 
program sought to meet two objectives that would impact women in particular: decreasing 
the number of unpaid electricity bills and instances of illegal electricity use, and reducing the 
amount of waste being improperly disposed into the environment. Known as Ecoelce, it enables 
residents to trade in their recyclable waste in exchange for credits to lower their electricity bill. 
Coelce established stationary and mobile collection facilities within the four communities, 
each equipped with a machine that weighs and calculates the value of customers’ recyclables. 
Customers use an electronic card linked to their account that credits the value of the waste to 
their electricity bill. Customers are also able to donate the value to other individuals, non-profits, 
or companies participating in the program. The exchange process is secure for customers 
because no money is physically exchanged. After the collection is made at the facility, all 
materials are sent to a recycling center for safe disposal and reuse.
In addition to implementing the pilot program, Coelce helped create formalized roles for 
residents whose primary source of income was through collecting recyclables in the streets. 
This establishment of a reliable and consistent form of income was especially important for 
women given their tendency to take on informal and unpaid work, and their important role in 
the city’s waste sector.
OUTCOMES
The Ecoelce pilot program saw dramatic results and was expanded due to its success. Over 
the course of the program’s first 10 years, 32,624 tons of waste were removed from the 
environment, R$ 5,255,737 of bonuses on electricity bills were given, and 134,129,606 KW/h 
of electricity were saved. The initiative has been particularly useful for women because it 
reduced the amount of time they spent recycling household waste by embedding recycling 
facilities within communities. In addition, women can participate in the program without fear 
of insecurity because the entire transaction is cash-free, and their time and financial costs 
related to providing and sustaining electricity for the household are lowered. 
The program is now available across the entire state of Ceará with 112 communities serviced 
in 30 municipalities. In addition, the initiative has been replicated in Rio de Janeiro (Ecoampla) 
and Santiago de Chile (Ecochilectra) and has received national and international recognition, 
including being named the winning project in Latin America by UN Global Compact. 
 
Sources: Enel (2017), Nel-lo and Mele (2016), Araujo (2011), Coelho et al. (2018), Pilo 
(2017), Arenas et. al. (2013), Coehlo et al. (2016)
Basic Urban Services
5.0  Case Studies

=== Página 98 ===
194
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design, 2020
3.1  Access
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
195

=== Página 99 ===
196
197
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
In Berkeley, California in the 1970’s, a group of disability activists called the Rolling Quads 
began breaking up curbs and installing makeshift ramps onto sidewalks to demand better 
access for wheelchair users. What people did not expect was that when “curb cuts” were 
finally installed, wheelchair users were not the only beneficiaries. Indeed, people with 
strollers, heavy shopping, suitcases, or simply reduced mobility use curb cuts all the time 
— for many it is the preferable route. In the same way, a gender-inclusive city works better 
for everyone. A city in which women, girls, and sexual and gender minorities of all ages and 
abilities can get around easily and safely, participate fully in the workforce and in public life, 
and lead healthy, sociable, and active lives is a city that improves life for everyone. A city in 
which women, girls, and sexual and gender minorities of all gender and abilities enjoy full 
social and economic inclusion is a city that accelerates progress for everyone.
To achieve this vision and meet the corporate requirements set out in the World Bank 
Environmental and Social Framework and Gender Strategy, an approach that actively 
includes a wider array of voices, perspectives, and priorities is critical. There can be no 
gender-inclusive city without gender-inclusive processes. This means committing to the 
active, meaningful participation of women, girls, and sexual and gender minorities; and to 
their learning and power as citizens. It requires an intersectional, cross-sectoral approach 
that considers how women’s, girls’, and sexual and gender minorities’ daily experiences are 
impacted by systemic factors in the built environment and according to their gender, their 
age, their race or ethnicity, their religion, their income, and their ability. Crucially, it means 
dedicating budget, staff, and expertise to incorporating gender inclusion into all phases of 
a project — not as an add-on, but as an integral goal of the project.
These principles are daunting, of course. Many development practitioners are on board 
with gender inclusion in theory, but in practice it can feel like another box to check; another 
burden on top of an already enormous workload; and a tenuous goal with little grounding 
in the day-to-day. This handbook has therefore attempted to make the pathway toward a 
gender-inclusive city clearer and more accessible to all readers involved in designing and 
delivering World Bank-funded projects. The guidelines are not intended to be interpreted 
as rigid standards, but instead as a resource for inspiration, suggestions, and direction — 
encouraging audiences to ask themselves honestly how to incorporate gender in their work 
and to proactively seek out new information and innovation in this area.
It bears reiterating that gender-inclusive urban planning and design processes must be 
carried out by asking women, girls, and sexual and gender minorities what the issues and 
barriers they face are, and what possible solutions could be. It is important not to fall into 
the trap of following the guidelines in Chapter 4 and attempting to respond to key questions 
without direct and in-depth consultation with women, girls, and sexual and gender minorities 
from the local community. While guidelines and even agreed-upon standards are useful 
and can motivate us to do better, there is simply no shortcut for actively and equitably 
including women’s, girls’, and sexual and gender minorities’ voices in a design or planning 
process. Their agency and participation is the most critical objective here, and will make the 
difference between merely addressing symptoms of gender inequity and meeting immediate 
needs, versus catalyzing transformative change in gender relations.
Ultimately, gender inclusion is not really a burden or problem. It is an opportunity. Over half 
of the world’s population are women, girls, and sexual and gender minorities. Their needs, 
desires, knowledge, and skills are untapped resources for urban planners and designers 
and cities as a whole. Their economic opportunity, social inclusion, political participation, 
and yes — their ideas for how to better design and plan cities — are critical to achieving the 
World Bank’s mission of prosperity for all.
6.1  Conclusion: Looking Forward
Conclusion:
Looking Forward

=== Página 100 ===
198
199
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
6.2  Further Resources
6.3  Reference List
KEY WORLD BANK DOCUMENTS
World Bank Environmental and Social Framework
World Bank Group Gender Strategy 2016-2023
WORLD BANK GENDER TAG RESOURCES
For Gender Tag training materials: type “gender” into WBG 
intranet or follow this link: https://worldbankgroup.sharepoint.com/
sites/Gender/Pages/Gender-Tag-11192018-173633.aspx
•	
For Gender-Tagged projects complete with gender actions 
and indicators, see Urban/Gender tags in World Bank 
Standard Reports
See also:
•	
Global Practice (GP) Follow-Up Notes to the Gender 
Strategy
•	
Regional Gender Action Plans (RGAPs)
•	
Systematic Country Diagnostics (SCD) and Country 
Partnership Frameworks (CPF)
WORLD BANK GENDER CHAMPIONS
For a list of designated “Gender Champions” across all Global 
Practices, follow this link:
https://worldbankgroup.sharepoint.com/sites/Gender/Pages/
pc/BankwideGenderContacts-09192018-210825/Gender-
Leads-09192018-211724.aspx
 
In addition to these Gender Champions, in-person resources and 
support are available for projects specifically involving Sexual 
and Gender Minorities and People with Disabilities. The World 
Bank has a Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity (SOGI) Global 
Advisor and a Global Disability Advisor who can assist teams in 
conducting analysis and consultations.
WORLD BANK GENDER TOOLKITS AND GUIDES
The following is a list of helpful toolkits and guides for incorporating 
gender into related areas of practice.
•	
Gender and Energy Role Playing: Training Guidebook, 2019
•	
Land Policies: Toolkit for Integrating Gender-Related Issues
•	
Toolkit for Mainstreaming Gender in Water Operations, 2016
UNITED NATIONS DOCUMENTS
The below documents include guides, toolkits, briefings, reports, 
and other helpful resources from the United Nations.
•	
Facts and Figures: Leadership and Political Participation | 
UN Women, 2019
•	
Gender Equality Observation for Latin America and the 
Caribbean | United Nations, 2018
•	
Gender Issue Guide: Gender Responsive Urban Legislation, 
Land and Governance | UN-HABITAT, 2015
•	
Gender Issue Guide: Housing and Slum Upgrading | UN-
HABITAT, 2012
•	
Gender Issue Guide: Urban Planning and Design | UN-
HABITAT, 2012
•	
Gender and Urban Planning: Issues and Trends | UN-
HABITAT, 2012
•	
Gender Equality and the New Urban Agenda | UN-HABITAT, 
2014
•	
Gender Equality and Sustainable Urbanization | UN Women, 
2009
•	
Gender Equality for Smarter Cities: Challenges and 
Progress | UN-HABITAT 2010
•	
In Brief: Women’s Leadership and Political Participation | 
UN Women, 2011
•	
Safe Cities and Safe Public Spaces | UN Women, 2017
•	
SDG 11 – Cities | United Nations, 2018
•	
State of Women in Cities | UN-HABITAT, 2013
SIMILAR URBAN PLANNING AND DESIGN 
TOOLKITS
For additional inspiration and support, see the below toolkits on 
gender-inclusive urban planning, design, and development from 
around the world.
•	
Gender Mainstreaming in Urban Development | City of 
Berlin
•	
Gender Mainstreaming in Urban Planning and Urban 
Development | City of Vienna, 2013
•	
Learning From Women to Create Gender Inclusive Cities | 
Women in Cities International, 2010
•	
Making Cities and Urban Spaces Safe for Women and Girls 
| ActionAid, 2013
•	
The Gender Manual: A Practical Guide | DFID, 2008
KEY LITERATURE
Below is a list of important further reading to build a deeper 
understanding of gender issues in urban planning and design.
•	
Gender and Development | Caroline Moser, 1993
•	
Gender and Planning | Susan S. Fainstein and Lisa J. 
Servon, 2009
•	
Gender, Urban Development and the Politics of Space | 
Silvia Chant and MacIlwaine, 2014
•	
Gender, Urban Space, and the Right to Everyday Life | 
Yasminah Beebeejaun
•	
Genderbashing: Sexuality, Gender, and the Regulation of 
Public Space | Ki Namaste, 1996
•	
Queers in the American City: Transgendered Perceptions 
of Urban Space | Petra Doan, 2007
•	
The Way She Moves: Mapping the Everyday Production of 
Gender-Space | Shilpa Ranade, 2007
•	
Women in the Urban Environment | Gerda R. Wekerle, 1980
•	
Women’s Fear and the Design of Public Space | Gill 
Valentine, 1990
ADDITIONAL READING
The articles and reports below will further enrich understanding 
around gender and urban planning and design.
•	
A place for everyone? Gender Equality and Urban Planning 
| Oxfam and RTPI, 2007
•	
Can cities be feminist? Inside the Global Rise of Female 
Mayors | Guardian, 2016
•	
Driving Toward Equality: Women, Ride-Hailing and the 
Sharing Economy | IFC, Accenture, Uber, 2018
•	
Gender 
Equality 
and 
Sustainable 
Urbanisation 
FACTSHEET | WomenWatch, 2009
•	
Gender issues in transportation: a short introduction | 
Institute for Transportation and Development Policy, 1999 
•	
How to Build a Feminist City: Baking gender equality into 
building and planning can improve the lives of millions for 
little cost | APolitical
•	
IFC: A Solutions Provider for Cities and Mayer | IFC, 2018
•	
Practical advice for more gender equality in the Vienna City 
Administration | City of Vienna Administration, 2011
•	
 Safe Cities for Women – From reality to rights | Action Aid, 
2014
•	
Tackling Childcare: The Business Case for Employer-
Supported Childcare | IFC, 2017
•	
The Need to Plan for Women: Planning with a Gender Lens 
| Cornell University, 2015
•	
The Women Mayors’ Network | National Democratic 
Institute, 2019
•	
Urban Gender-Based Violence Risk Assessment Guidance: 
Identifying Risk Factors for Urban Refugees | Women’s 
Refugee Commission, 2015
•	
Women and urban crises. Gender sensitive strategies for 
managing critical urban environments in the South and in 
Eastern Europe | UNESCO
REFERENCE LIST
AASHTO 
(America 
Association 
of 
State 
Highway 
and 
Transportation Officials). 2013. Commuting in America 2013: The 
National Report on Commuting Patterns and Trends. Washington 
DC: American Association of State Highway and Transportation 
Officials. https://traveltrends-dev.transportation.org/wp-content/
uploads/sites/62/2019/07/ES_Executive-Summary_CAES-
4_web.pdf
Agarwal, Bina and Pradeep Panda. 2007. “Toward Freedom from 
Domestic Violence: The Neglected Obvious.” Journal of Human 
Development 8 (3), 359-388. doi: 10.1080/14649880701462171.
Alemán, Alonso Ayala. 2009. Community Organisations, 
Misiones and Integration of Barrios of Caracas, Venezuela: The 
Case of the Cameba Upgrading Project. IHS Working Paper 21. 
Rotterdam: Institute for Housing and Urban Development Studies. 
https://www.ihs.  nl/sites/corporate/files/IHS_WP__021__Ayala_
Aleman__Alonzo__Community_organisations_misiones_and_
integration_of_Barrios_of_Caracas_2009.pdf
Allendorf, K., 2007. “Do Women’s Land Rights Promote 
Empowerment and Child Health in Nepal?” World Development 
35 (11): p. 1975-1988, 1980, 1985.
Amnesty International. 2010. Risking Rape to Reach a Toilet: 
Women’s Experiences in the Slums of Nairobi, Kenya. An 
Amnesty International Report. London: Amnesty Internaiontal. 
Anastario, Michael, Nadine Shehab, and Lynn Lawry. 2009. 
“Increased Gender-Based Violence among Women Internally 
Displaced in Mississippi 2 Years Post-Hurricane Katrina.” 
Disaster Medicine and Public Health Preparedness 3(1):18-26. 
doi: 10.1097/DMP.0b013e3181979c32. 
Angelou, Niki, Cindy J. Suh, Inka Ivette Schomer, Amanda Marin 
Beaujon, Palmisano Giacomo, Elisabeth Maier. 2019.  Gender 
and Energy Role Playing: Training Guidebook (English). 
Washington DC: World Bank. http://documents.worldbank.org/
curated/en/823481551763820142/Gender-and-Energy-Role-
Playing-Training-Guidebook
APS (Advocates for Public Space). 2015. “Informal Places for Active 
Recreation and Children's Play in Kampala Slums, Uganda.” Report 
commissioned by Healthbridge. https://healthbridge.ca/images/
uploads/library/informal-open-spaces-report_final_2.pdf
Araujo, Sergio. 2011. “COELCE (Group ENDESA) Encourages 
Responsible Waste Management with Credits on Electrical Bill 
in Fortaleza (Brasil).” In BipiZ CSR Best Practices Database. 
https://www.bipiz.org/en/csr-best-practices/coelce-group-endesa-
encourages-responsible-waste-management-with-credits-on-
electrical-bill-in-fortaleza-brasil.html 
Arenas, Daniel, Pablo Sanchez, and Matthew Murphy. 2013. 
"Different Paths to Collaboration between Businesses and Civil 
Society and the Role of Third Parties." Journal of Business Ethics 115 
(4): 723-39. http://www.jstor.org.focus.lib.kth.se/stable/42001896. 
Arendt, Hannah (1958). The Human Condition. Chicago: University 
of Chicago Press.
Arnstein, Sherry R. 1969. “A Ladder of Citizen Participation.” 
Journal of the American Planning Association 35 (4): 216-224. 
Asia News Network. 2016. "Women Disproportionately Affected by 
Disaster, Experts Say." E.Republic, May 17. https://www.govtech.
com/em/disaster/Women-Disproportionately-Affected-by-Disaster-
Experts-Say.html  
Asian Development Bank. 2011. Gender Mainstreaming, Case 
Studies: India. Mandaluyong City, Philippines: Asian Development 
Bank. 
https://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/publication/29934/
gender-mainstreaming-case-studies-india.pdf 
Asian Development Bank. 2015a. Gender Mainstreaming Case 
Study—India: Kerala Sustainable Urban Development Project. 
Mandaluyong City, Philippines: Asian Development Bank. https://
www.adb.org/sites/default/files/publication/160695/gender-
mainstreaming-ind-kerala-urban.pdf
Asian Development Bank. 2015b. Gender equality results case 
study—India: Urban Water Supply and Environmental Improvement 
Project. Mandaluyong City, Philippines: Asian Development Bank. 
https://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/publication/160696/gender-
mainstreaming-ind-urban-water.pdf
Asian Development Bank. 2017. ADB Support for Gender and 
Development (2005–2015) Supplementary Linked Document E 
(Country Portfolio Assessment). Mandaluyong City, Philippines: 
Asian Development Bank. https://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/
evaluation-document/181135/files/country-portfolio-assessment-
pakistan.pdf 
Asian Development Bank. 2018. Completion Report—India: Kerala 
Sustainable Urban Development Project. Mandaluyong City, 
Philippines: Asian Development Bank. https://www.adb.org/sites/
default/files/project-documents/32300/32300-013-pcr-en.pdf
Aspinall, P., Mavros, P., Coyne, R., & Roe, J. 2015. “The Urban 
Brain: Analyzing Outdoor Physical Activity with Mobile EEG.” British 
Journal of Sports Medicine 49 (4): 272–276. http://doi.org/10.1136/
bjsports-2012-091877 
Badgett, M.V. Lee. 2014.  The Economic Cost of Stigma and 
the Exclusion of LGBT People: A Case Study of India (English). 
Washington, DC: World Bank. http://documents.worldbank.org/
curated/en/527261468035379692/The-economic-cost-of-stigma-
and-the-exclusion-of-LGBT-people-a-case-study-of-India
Balch, Oliver. 2016. “The New Generation of Buenos Aires Trash 
Pickers Reenergizing Recycling in the Capital.” The Guardian, 
January 20. theguardian.com/environment/2016/jan/20/buenos-
aires-litter-pickers-cartoneros-recycling-argentina-environment
Bapat, Meera and Indu Agarwal. 2003. “Our Needs, Our Priorities: 
Women and Men from the Slums in Mumbai and Pune Talk 
about their Needs for Water and Sanitation.” Environment and 
Urbanisation 15:2, 71-86
Barker, G., Ricardo, C., Nascimento, M., Olukoya, A., & Santos, 
C. 2010. "Questioning gender norms with men to improve health 
outcomes: Evidence of impact." Global Public Health 5(5), 539-553.
Bartlett, Sheridan, David Dodman, Jorgelina Hardoy, David 
Satterthwaite, and Cecilia Tacoli. 2009. “Social Aspects of Climate 
Change in Urban Areas in Low and Middle-Income Nations.” 
World Bank Fifth Urban Research Symposium on Cities and 
Climate Change: Responding to an Urgent Agenda.  http://
siteresources.worldbank.org/INTURBANDEVELOPMENT/
Resources/336387-1342044185050/8756911-1342044630817/
V2Chap27.pdf
Benavides, Gina Sánchez, Silvana Sánchez Pinto, Gardenia 
Chávez Nuñez, Azucena Soledispa Toro, and María Sol Paredes. 
2007. Diagnóstico de la Situación del Derecho de las Mujeres a la 
Vivienda Adecuada desde una Perspectiva de Género en Ecuador. 

=== Página 101 ===
200
201
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
Quito, Ecuador: Comité de América Latina y El Caribea para la 
Defensa de los Derechos de la Mujer. 
Bennett, Mark and Anne Stack. 2018. Designing and Planning the 
Common Space through a Gender Perspective in La Favorita, 
Mendoza, Argentina. Paper prepared for Harvard University 
Graduate School of Design fall 2018 studio course “Gendering 
Urban Development: Making room for women in urban planning 
and design”, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Benston, Margaret. 1969. "The Political Economy of Women's 
Liberation." Monthly Review  21(4): 13–27.  doi:10.14452/MR-
021-04-1969-08_2.
Beyer, Kristen M. M., Andrea Kaltenbach, Aniko Szabo, Sandra 
Bogar, F. Javier Nieto, and Kristen M. Malecki. 2014. “Exposure 
to Neighborhood Green Space and Mental Health: Evidence from 
the Survey of the Health of Wisconsin.” International Journal of 
Environmental Research and Public Health, 11(3): 3453–3472. 
http://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph110303453 
Bhattacharya, Tithi, ed. 2017. Social Reproduction Theory. 
London: Pluto Press.
Bonnet, Florence, Joann Vanek and Martha Chen. 2019. 
Women and Men in the Informal Economy – A Statistical Brief. 
Manchester, UK: WIEGO.
Borker, Girija. 2018. "Safety First: Perceived Risk of Street 
Harassment and Education Choices of Women." Working Paper 
available 
at: 
https://girijaborker.files.wordpress.com/2017/11/
borker_jmp.pdf 
Brot für die Welt. 2009. “Dialog 01: Gender Mainstreaming 
Konkret. Neun Beispiele Guter Praxis aus Vier Kontinenten.” 
Report for Diakonisches Werk der EKD e. V. für die Aktion “Brot 
für die Welt.”
Caron, Cynthia. 2013. “Do Secure Land Tenure and Property 
Rights Necessarily Reduce Gender-Based Violence?” Land 
Links, USAID Blog. December 12. https://land-links.org/2013/12/
do-secure-land-tenure-and-property-rights-necessarily-reduce-
gender-based-violence/
Catacutan, Delia, Ma Elena Chiong-Javier, Utkur Djanibekov, 
Meine van Noordwijk, and Grace Villamor. 2014. “Gender 
Differences in Land-Use Decisions: Shaping Multifunctional 
Landscapes?” Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability 
6. 
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S1877343513001760#bib0045.
CDMX (Ciudad de México). 2016. “Encuesta Nacional de 
Victimización y Percepción sobre Seguridad Pública de CDMX.” 
Cited in Libertun de Duren, Nora, et al. 2018. Inclusive Cities: 
Urban 
Productivity Through 
Gender 
Equality. 
Washington 
DC: 
Inter-American 
Development 
Bank. 
doi: 
http://dx.doi.
org/10.18235/0001320 
CES- Current Employment Statistics (database). 2018. United 
States Bureau of Labor Statistics, Washington, DC. (accessed 
September 13, 2019), https://www.bls.gov/ces/data/home.htm
Chigbu, Uchendu Eugene, Gaynor Paradza, and Walter Dachaga. 
2019. "Differentiations in Women’s Land Tenure Experiences: 
Implications for Women’s Land Access and Tenure Security in Sub-
Saharan Africa," Land 8(2). https://doi.org/10.3390/land8020022
CIVITAS. 2014. Smart Choices for Cities Gender Equality and 
Mobility: Mind the Gap! Policy Note compiling data from the following 
sources: ISFORT- Istituto Superiore di Formazione e Ricerca. 
2011. Trasporti La domanda di mobilità degli italiani, rapporto 
congiunturale di fine anno; UK National Travel Survey. 2010. 
Bundesministerium fuer Verkehr, Bau und Stadtentwicklung, 2008; 
Ministère de l’Écologie, du Développement Durable et de l‘Énergie, 
2008. https://civitas.eu/sites/default/files/civ_pol-an2_m_web.pdf  
Coelho, Alexa Pupiara Flores, Carmem Lúcia Colomé Beck, 
Marcelo Nunes da Silva Fernandes, Natiellen Quatrin Freitas, 
Francine Cassol Prestes, Juliana Zancan Tonel. 2016. “Women 
Waste Pickers: Living Conditions, Work, and Health.” Revista 
Gaúcha de Enfermagem 37 (3). https://dx.doi.org/10.1590/1983-
1447.2016.03.57321
Coelho, Alexa Pupiara Flores, Carmem Lúcia Colomé Beck, 
Rosângela Marion da Silva, Denise de Oliveira Vedootto, Jonatan 
da Rosa Pereira da Silva. 2018. “Female Work and Health In The 
Perspective Of Women Recyclable Waste Collectors.” Texto & 
Contexto - Enfermagem 27 (1). http://dx.doi.org/10.1590/0104-
07072018002630016
Commission for the Prevention of Violence Against Women. 1989. 
Violence Against Women in the Aftermath of the October 17, 1989 
Earthquake: A Report to the Mayor and City Council of the City 
of Santa Cruz. Santa Cruz, CA: City of Santa Cruz. As quoted by 
Elaine Enarson in “Violence Against Women in Disasters: Fact 
Sheet.” Also available on the website of the Gender and Disaster 
Network at: http://www.gdnonline.org/resources/VAW%20in%20
Disasters%20Fact%20Sheet%202006. Doc
COHRE (Centre on Housing Rights and Evictions). 2008. 
Women, Slums and Urbanisation: Examining the Causes and 
Consequences. Geneva: COHRE. 
Community Marketing. 2014. “Welcoming the Transgender 
Traveler: A Study for the Greater Fort Lauderdale Convention & 
Visitors Bureau”. Available at: https://www.communitymarketinginc.
com/documents/temp/CMI_GFLCVB_TransgenderTraveler2014.
pdf
Community-Led Housing London. 2019. " Older Women’s
Co-Housing." From Community-Led Housing London Website. 
https://www.communityledhousing.london/project/older-womens-
co-housing/
Connective Cities (database). 2018. “SafetiPin Mapping Tool 
in Bogotá: Using SafetiPin to Build Safer Cities For Women.” 
Available at:  https://www.connective-cities.net/es/gute-praktiken/
details/gutepraktik/safetipin-mapping-tool-in-bogota-1/
Davis, Ian, Kala Peiris De Costa, Khurshid Alam, Madhavi 
Malalgoda Ariyabandu, Mihir R. Bhatt, Rita Schneider, and Satchit 
Balsari. 2005. “Tsunami, Gender, and Recovery.” Special Issue 
for International Day for Disaster Risk Reduction 6. https://www.
gdnonline.org/resources/tsunami%20-genderandrecovery.pdf
Decker, Annie. 2006. “Stuck at Home: When Driving Isn’t a Choice.” 
Access 29: 28-33. 
http://www.accessmagazine.org/fall-2006/stuck-home-driving-isnt-
choice/
DEVCO 
(Directorate-General 
for 
International 
Cooperation 
and Development). 2016. “Annex 7: Monitoring and indicators.” 
In Integrating The Environment And Climate Change Into EU 
International Cooperation And Development: Towards Sustainable 
Development, 110-116. Tools And Methods Series Guidelines 6. 
Brussels: DEVCO.
Doan, Petra L. 2007. “Queers in the American City: Transgendered 
Perceptions of Urban Space.” Gender, Place & Culture 14 (1): 
57–74. doi:10.1080/09663690601122309.
Doan, Petra L., 2016. Queerying Planning: Challenging 
Heteronormative Assumptions and Reframing Planning Practice. 
Abingdon: Routledge.
Dowse, Leanne, Karen Soldatic, Jo Spangaro, Georgia van Toorn. 
2016. “Mind the Gap: The Extent of Violence against Women with 
Disabilities in Australia.” Australian Journal of Social Issues 51: 
341-359. 10.1002/j.1839-4655.2016.tb01235.x. 
Duncan, Kirsty. 2007. “Global Climate Change and Women’s 
Health.” Women & Environments International Magazine 74/75: 
10-11.
6.3  Reference List
Dunckel-Graglia, Amy. 2013. “‘Pink Transportation’ in Mexico City: 
Reclaiming Urban Space through Collective Action against Gender-
Based Violence.” Gender & Development 21(2): 265-276. DOI: 
10.1080/13552074.2013.802131.
Edholm, 
Felicity, 
Olivia 
Harris, 
and 
Kate 
Young. 
1978. 
“Conceptualising Women.” Critique of Anthropology 3 ( 9-10): 
101–130. https://doi.org/10.1177/0308275x7800300905.
El Feki, Shereen, Brian Heilman, and Gary Barker, Eds. 2017. 
Understanding Masculinities: Results from the International Men 
and Gender Equality Survey (IMAGES) – Middle East and North 
Africa. Cairo and Washington, D.C.: UN Women and Promundo-US. 
Enarson, Elaine, Alice Fothergill, Lori Peek. 2007. “Gender and 
Disaster: Foundations and Directions.” In: Handbook of Disaster 
Research, edited by Havidan Rodriguez, Enrico Quarantelli, and 
Russell Dynes, 130–146. New York: Springer.  
Enel. 2017. Ecoenel: 10 Years Changing Waste Materials into 
Opportunities. Annual Report. https://www.enel.com.br/content/
dam/enel-br/quemsomos/iniciativas/ecoenel/Projeto%2010%20
anos%20Ecoenel.EN.pdf 
European Institute for Gender Equality. 2017. Gender Budgeting. 
Luxembourg: European Union. Doi: 10.2839/816102. 
Fainstein, Susan S., and Lisa J. Servon. 2005. Gender and 
Planning: A Reader. New Brunswick: Rutgers University Press. 
Fairs, Marcus. 2017. “Survey of Top Architecture Firms Reveals 
"Quite Shocking" Lack Of Gender Diversity at Senior Levels.” 
Dezeen, 
November 
16. 
https://www.dezeen.com/2017/11/16/
survey-leading-architecture-firms-reveals-shocking-lack-gender-
diversity-senior-levels/
Falú, A., P. Morey, and L. Rainero. 2002. “Uso del Tiempo y del 
Espacio: Asimetrias de Genero y de Clase en Ciudad y Vida 
Cotidiana.” Córdoba, Argentina. Informe Observatorio Genero, 
CEPAL.
FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations). 
2002. “Gender and Access to Land.” FAO Land Tenure Studies 
#4: Gender and Access to Land. Rome: FAO. http://www.fao.org/3/
y4308e/y4308e00.htm#Contents
Federici, Silvia. 1975. Wages against Housework. Bristol: Power of 
Women Collective and the Falling Wall Press. 
Federici, Silvia. 2018. El Patriarcado del Salario: Críticas Feministas 
al Marxismo. Madrid: Traficantes de Sueños.
Ferguson, Susan, and David McNally. 2013. “Capital, Labour-Power 
and Gender Relations.” Introduction to Marxism and the Oppression 
of Women, edited by Lise Vogel, xxiv. Netherlands: Brill. 
Ferrant, Gaëlle, Luca Maria Pesando and Keiko Nowacka. 2014. 
Unpaid Care Work: The Missing Link in the Analysis of Gender Gaps 
in Labour Outcomes. Issue Paper: OECD Development Centre. 
https://www.oecd.org/dev/development-gender/Unpaid_care_work.
pdf
Forsyth, Ann. 2001. “Nonconformist Populations and Planning 
Sexuality and Space: Nonconformist Populations and Planning 
Practice.” Journal of Planning Literature 15(3): 339–58. https://doi.
org/10.1177/08854120122093069.
FRA (European Union Agency for Fundamental Rights). 2013. 
European Union Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual and Transgender 
Survey: Results at a Glance. A FRA- European Union Agency for 
Fundamental Rights Report. Vienna, Austria. https://fra.europa.eu/
en/publication/2013/eu-lgbt-survey-european-union-lesbian-gay-
bisexual-and-transgender-survey-results     
FRA (European Union Agency for Fundamental Rights). 2014. 
Violence Against Women: An EU-wide Survey. A FRA- European 
Union Agency for Fundamental Rights Report. Vienna, Austria. 
https://fra.europa.eu/sites/default/files/fra_uploads/fra-2014-vaw-
survey-main-results-apr14_en.pdf 
Frank, Lawrence, Peter Engelke, Tom Schmid. 2003. Health 
and Community Design: The Impact of the Built Environment on 
Physical Activity. Washington, DC:  Island Press.
Fraser, Nancy. 2016. “Contradictions of Capital and Care.” New 
Left Review 100. https://newleftreview.org/issues/II100/articles/
nancy-fraser-contradictions-of-capital-and-care
Fraser, Erika, Kalpana Viswanath, and Laura MacLean. 2017. 
Violence against Women and Girls, Infrastructure and Cities. 
An Infrastructure and Cities for Economic Development (ICED) 
Briefing Paper. http://icedfacility.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/11/
VAWG-Infrastructure-and-Cities-ICED-Briefing-Note-31.03.2017.
pdf
Geere, Jo-Anne and Paul Hunter. 2019. “The Association of Water 
Carriage, Water Supply and Sanitation Usage with Maternal and 
Child Health. A Combined Analysis of 49 Multiple Indicator Cluster 
Surveys From 41 Countries.” International Journal of Hygiene and 
Environmental Health. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijheh.2019.08.007
Global Utmaning (website). 2019. Innovation Lab Botkyrka. 
Available at: https://www.globalutmaning.se/urbangirlsmovement/
innovationslabb-botkyrka/    
Gokhale, Vasudha. 2008. “Role of Women in Disaster Management: 
An Analytical Study with Reference to Indian Society.” Paper 
prepared for the 14th World Conference on Earthquake 
Engineering. October 12-17, 2008, Beijing, China. https://www.iitk.
ac.in/nicee/wcee/article/14_10-0049.PDF 
Gonsalves, Gregg S., Edward H. Kaplan, and A. David Paltiel. 
2015. “Reducing Sexual Violence by Increasing the Supply of 
Toilets in Khayelitsha, South Africa: A Mathematical Model” PLoS 
ONE 10(4): e0122244. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0122244 
Graciani, Auxiliadora, José R Banegas, López-Garcıa Esther, and 
Rodrıguez-Artalejo Fernando. 2004. “Prevalence of Disability and 
Associated Social and Health-Related Factors among the Elderly 
in Spain: a Population-Based Study.” Maturitas 48 (4): 381–92. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.maturitas.2003.10.004.
Greed, Clara H. 1994. Women in Planning: Creating Gendered 
Realities. London: Routledge.
Grigolo, Michele. 2007. Local Governments and Human Rights: 
Some Critical Reflections. Columbia Human Rights Law Review 
49.1(1): 
67-98. 
http://hrlr.law.columbia.edu/files/2018/01/
MicheleGrigoloLocalGovern.pdf (pg 84)
Groce, N., N. Bailey, R. Lang, J. F. Trani and M. Ket Water. 2011. 
“Sanitation Issues For Persons with Disabilities In Low- And 
Middle-income Countries: A Literature Review And Discussion of 
Implications for Global Health and International Development.” 
Journal of Water and Health 2011 (09.4): 617-627.
Guyo, Fatuma B. 2017. “Colonial and Post-Colonial Changes and 
Impact on Pastoral Women’s Roles and Status.” Pastoralism 7(13). 
https://doi.org/10.1186/s13570-017-0076-2
Gyamera, Ebenezer A., Edward Eric Duncan, J. S. Y. Kuma, and 
Anthony Arko-Adjei. 2018. “Land Acquisition in Ghana: Dealing 
with the Challenges and the Way Forward.” Journal of Agricultural 
Economics, Extension and Rural Development 6(1):664-672.
Habitat for Humanity. 2016.  Shelter Report 2016, Level the Field: 
Ending Gender Inequality in Land Rights. https://www.habitat.org/
sites/default/files/shelter-report-2016.pdf
Handy, Susan L., Marlon G. Boarnet, Reid Ewing, and Richard E 
Killingsworth. 2002. “How the Built Environment Affects Physical 
Activity: Views from Urban Planning.” American Journal of 
Preventive Medicine 23(2): 64–73.
Harpham, Trudy. 2009. “Urban Health in Developing Countries: 
6.3  Reference List

=== Página 102 ===
202
203
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
What Do We Know and Where Do We Go?” Health and Place 
15(1): 107-16. 
Harriss-White, Barbara, Wendy Olsen, Penny Vera Sanso, and V. 
Suresh. 2013. “Multiple Shocks and Slum Household Economies in 
South India.” Economy and Society 42(3): 400-431.
Henderson, Vernon. 2003. "The Urbanization Process and 
Economic Growth: The So-What Question." Journal of Economic 
Growth 8 (1): 47-71. http://www.jstor.org/stable/40215937.
Hindin, M.J. and Adair, L.S. 2002. “Who’s at Risk? Factors 
Associated with Intimate Partner Violence in the Philippines.” Social 
Science & Medicine 55: 1385–1399. 
 
Hoai, Ahn Tran and Ann Schlyter. 2010. “Gender and Class in 
Urban Transport: The Cases of Xian and Hanoi.” Environment and 
Urbanisation 22 (1). https://doi.org/10.1177/0956247810363526
Hobbs, N., Mark A. Green, C. Griffiths, H. Jordan, J. Saunders, 
H. Grimmer, J. McKenna. 2017. “Access and Quality of Parks 
and Associations with Obesity: A Cross-Sectional Study.” SSM 
Population Health 3: 722–729. doi: 10.1016/j.ssmph.2017.07.007
Hochschild, Arlie R. 1989. The Second Shift. New York, NY: Avon 
Books.
Holt-Lunstad, Julianne, Timothy B. Smith, Mark Baker, Tyler 
Harris, and David Stephenson. 2015. “Loneliness and Social 
Isolation as Risk Factors for Mortality: A Meta-Analytic Review.” 
Perspectives 
on 
Psychological 
Science 
10(2): 
227–37. 
doi:10.1177/1745691614568352.
Hsu, H.-P.  2011. “How Does Fear of Sexual Harassment on Transit 
Affect Women’s Use of Transit?” Women’s Issues in Transportation: 
Summary of the 4th International Conference, Vol. 2: Technical 
Papers, Transportation Research Board Conference Proceeding 
46 (pp. 85-94). Washington DC.
Hughes, Katherine and Elisabeth Wickeri. 2011. “A Home in the 
City: Women’s Struggle to Secure Adequate Housing in Urban 
Tanzania.” Fordham International Law Journal 34(4): 788-929. 
http://law.fordham.edu/ publications/index.ihtml?pubid=300
Hutchison, James. 2015. “Pakistan: Building Back Better.” A Project 
Report for Asian Development Bank. Manila: Asian Development 
Bank. adb.org/results/building-back-better-pakistan
IACHR (Inter-American Commission on Human Rights). 2015. 
Violence against Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Trans and Intersex 
Persons in the Americas. http://www.oas.org/en/iachr/reports/pdfs/
ViolenceLGBTIPersons.pdf
IASC (Inter-Agency Standing Committee). 2015. Guidelines for 
Integrating Gender-Based Violence Interventions in Humanitarian 
Action: Reducing Risk, Promoting Resilience and Aiding Recovery. 
An Inter-Agency Standing Committee Report in partnership with 
UNICEF (United Nations Children's Fund), UNFPA (United Nations 
Population Fund), and Global Protection Cluster. Geneva: IASC. 
https://gbvguidelines.org/en/
ICRW (International Center for Research on Women). 2007. 
Women’s Property Rights, HIV and AIDS, and Domestic Violence: 
Research Findings from Two Rural Districts in South Africa and 
Uganda. ICRW Report in partnership with the Human Sciences 
Research Council and Associates for Development. Cape Town: 
HSRC 
Press. 
https://n2r4h9b5.stackpathcdn.com/wp-content/
uploads/2016/10/Women's-property-rights-HIV-and-AIDS-and-
domestic-violence.pdf
IDB (Inter-American Development Bank). 2016. The Relationship 
between Gender and Transport. An IDB Report. New York: IDB. 
https://publications.iadb.org/en/relationship-between-gender-and-
transport
ILO (International Labor Organization). 2017. World Employment 
and Social Outlook: Trends for Women 2017. An ILO Report. 
Geneva: 
ILO. 
https://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---
dgreports/---inst/documents/publication/wcms_557245.pdf
INEGI (Instituto Nacional de Estadística y Geografía). 2011. 
“Encuesta Nacional de Violencia Contra las Mujeres.” Cited 
in Libertun de Duren, Nora, et al. 2018. Inclusive Cities: 
Urban Productivity Through Gender Equality. Washington 
DC: Inter-American Development Bank. doi: http://dx.doi.
org/10.18235/0001320
INEGI (Instituto Nacional de Estadística y Geografía). 2014. 
“Encuesta Nacional sobre Victimización y Percepción de la 
Seguridad Pública.” Cited in Libertun de Duren, Nora, et al. 2018. 
Inclusive Cities: Urban Productivity Through Gender Equality. 
Washington DC: Inter-American Development Bank. doi: http://
dx.doi.org/10.18235/0001320
Inter-Parliamentary Union. 2019. "Women in Parliament in 2018 
The Year in Review." Factsheet from Inter-Parliamentary Union. 
https://www.ipu.org/resources/publications/reports/2019-03/
women-in-parliament-in-2018-year-in-review
Iqbal, Sarah. 2018. Women, Business, and the Law 2018 (English). 
Washington, DC: World Bank. http://documents.worldbank.org/
curated/en/926401524803880673/Women-Business-and-the-
Law-2018
ITDP (Institute for Transportation and Development Policy). 2018. 
Women and Children's Access to the City. An ITDP Report. New 
York: 
ITDP. 
https://www.itdp.org/publication/women-childrens-
access-city/
James, Sandy E., Jody L. Herman, Susan Rankin, Mara Keisling, 
Lisa Mottet, and Ma’ayan Anafi. 2016. Executive Summary of the 
2015 Transgender Survey. Washington, DC: National Center for 
Transgender Equality. https://transequality.org/sites/default/files/
docs/usts/USTS-Executive-Summary-Dec17.pdf
Jeffery, C. Ray. 1972. Crime Prevention through Environmental 
Design. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage Publications.
Joungn. 2019. “Six Bangladeshi Women on the Front Lines of 
Climate Change” PBS, March 8. http://www.pbs.org/wnet/peril-
and-promise/2019/03/six-bangladeshi-women-on-the-front-lines-
of-climate-change/ 2019
Kar, Kamal and Robert Chambers. 2008. Handbook on 
Community-Led Total Sanitation. London/Falmer,Brighton: PLAN 
UK/IDS. http://www.communityledtotalsanitation.org/
Katz, Elizabeth and Juan Sebastian Chamorro. 2002. “Gender, 
Land Rights, and the Household Economy in Rural Nicaragua and 
Honduras”. Paper prepared for USAID/BASIS CRSP. Madison, 
Wisconsin: USAID/BASIS CRSP.
Keane, Carl. 1998. “Evaluating the Influence of Fear of Crime as an 
Environmental Mobility Restrictor on Women’s Routine Activities.”  
Environment and Behavior 30(1): 60-74.
KEDV (Kadin Emegini Degerlendirme Vakfi). 2019. Available at: 
https://www.kedv.org.tr/afet-ve-goc
Keown, Leslie Ann. 2010. Precautions Taken to Avoid Victimization: 
A Gender Perspective. A Statistics Canada Report in Canadian 
Social Trends, Catalogue no. 11-008-X. 
Kerber, Linda K. 1988. “Separate Spheres, Female Worlds, 
Woman's Place: The Rhetoric of Women's History” The Journal of 
American History 75 (1): 9–39. doi:10.2307/1889653. 
Khosla, Rena. 2009. Addressing Gender Concerns in India’s Urban 
Renewal Mission. A Capacity Building for Decentralised Urban 
Governance Project Report, a joint initiative by the Government 
of India and the United Nations Development Programme 
(UNDP). New Delhi: UNDP. http:// data.undp.org.in/dg/pub/
AddressingGenderConcerns.pdf 
6.3  Reference List
Klein Alisa. 2008. Preventing and Responding to Sexual Violence 
in Disasters: A Planning Guide for Prevention and Response. 
A Joint Publication of the Louisiana Foundation Against Sexual 
Assault (LaFASA) and National Sexual Violence Resource Center 
(NSVRC). 
https://www.nsvrc.org/sites/default/files/Publications_
NSVRC_Guides_Sexual-Violence-in-Disasters_A-planning-guide-
for-prevention-and-response_0.pdf
Kounkuey Design Initiative. 2018. Incorporating Gender and 
Gender-Based Violence Prevention in Urban Planning and Design 
in Vulnerable Communities in Argentina: Settlement Profiles and 
Diagnostic Report. A World Bank Consultant Report. Washington 
DC: World Bank. anas
Kunieda, Mika and Aimée Gauthier. 2007. Gender and Urban 
Transport: Smart and Affordable. Module 7a, Sustainable Transport: 
A Sourcebook for Policy Makers in Developing Cities. A Sustainable 
Urban Transport Project (SUTP) Report. Bonn: SUTP. https://www.
sutp.org/en/resources/publications-by-topic/sutp-sourcebook-
modules.html
Kwiringira, Japheth, Peter Atekyereza, Charles Niwagaba, and 
Isabel Günther. 2014. “Gender Variations in Access, Choice to Use 
and Cleaning of Shared Latrines; Experiences from Kampala Slums, 
Uganda.” BMC Public Health (14): 1180. http://www.biomedcentral.
com/1471-2458/14/1180
Landesa. 2012. Women’s Secure Rights to Land: Benefits, Barriers 
and Best Practices. Issue Brief by Landesa and The Center for 
Women’s Land Rights. Seattle, WA: Landesa. landesa.org/wp-
content/uploads/ Landesa-Women-and-Land-Issue-Brief.pdf. See 
also Katz and Chamorro, “Gender, Land Rights and the Household 
Economy in Rural Nicaragua and Honduras,” 2002. See also C. 
Doss, “The Effects of Intrahousehold Property Ownership on 
Expenditure Patterns in Ghana”, J. AFR. ECON 15(1): 149-180, at 
171. 2006.
Lanham, Michele, Kathleen Ridgeway, Robyn Dayton, Brtiany M. 
Castillo, Claire Brennan, Dirk A. Davis, Dadrina Emmanuel, Giuliana 
J. Morales, Clifford Cheririser, Brandy Rodriguez, Juana Cooke, 
Karin Santi, and Emily Evens. 2019. “‘We're Going to Leave You for 
Last, Because of How You Are’ Transgender Women's Experiences 
of Gender-Based Violence in Healthcare, Education, and Police 
Encounters in Latin America and the Caribbean.”  Violence and 
Gender, 6(1), 37–46. doi:10.1089/vio.2018.0015
Larsson, Anita, and Tora Friberg. 1999. “Om Kvinnligt Och Manligt i 
Planeringens Konsneutrala Varld.” Nordisk Arkitekturf-Orskning 12 
(2): 33–43.
Lee, Yun-Suk, and Linda J. Waite. 2005. “Husbands’ and Wives’ 
Time Spent on Housework: A Comparison of Measures.” Journal of 
Marriage and Family 67(2): 328-336. 
Leigh, Nancey Green. 2007. Gender and Planning: A Reader. 
Susan S. Fainstein and Lisa J. Servon, eds., Urban Geography, 
28:3, 299-300, DOI: 10.2747/0272-3638.28.3.299
Linthicum, Kate. 2016. “Why Mexico is Giving Out Half a Million 
Rape Whistles to Female Subway Riders.” Los Angeles Times, 
October 23. https://www.latimes.com/world/mexico-americas/la-fg-
mexico-sexual-assault-20161017-snap-story.html 
LIXIL. 2016. The True Cost of Poor Sanitation. A LIXIL Report in 
Collaboration with Oxford Economics. Tokyo: LIXIL. https://www.
lixil.com/en/sustainability/pdf/the_true_cost_of_poor_sanitation_e.
pdf
Long, Jeanne, Bethany A. Caruso, Maribel Mamani, Gladys 
Camacho, Koenraad Vancraeynest, Matthew C. Freeman. 2015. 
“Developing Games as a Qualitative Method for Researching 
Menstrual Hygiene Management in Rural Bolivia.” Waterlines 34(1): 
68-78. doi: 10.3362/1756-3488.2015.007
Lynch, G., and Atkins, S. 1988. “The Influence of Personal Security 
Fears on Women’s Travel Patterns.” Transportation 15(3): 257-277.
Machin, J., and K. Lucas. 2004. “Integrating Crime and Fear of 
Crime with Transport and Accessibility Improvements in Deprived 
Areas in the UK.”   Paper prepared for the Annual European 
Transport Conference, Strasbourg, October 4-6.
Marium, Sarah. 2014. “Women’s Level of Education and It s Effect 
on Domestic Violence in Rural Bangladesh.” Journal Of Humanities 
And Social Science 19(5):40–45.
Marzullo, Michelle A., and Alyn J. Libman. 2009. Research 
Overview: Hate Crimes and Violence Against Lesbian, Gay, 
Bisexual and Transgender People. A Report by the Human 
Rights Campaign Foundation. Washington, D.C.: Human Rights 
Campaign 
Foundation. 
https://assets2.hrc.org/files/assets/
resources/Hatecrimesandviolenceagainstlgbtpeople_2009.pdf.
McGuckin, Nancy, Johanna Zmud, and Yukiko Nakamoto. 2005. 
“Trip Chaining Trends in the U.S.- Understanding Travel Behavior 
for Policy Making.” Transportation Research Record 1917(1): 
199–204. https://doi.org/10.1177/0361198105191700122
McHarg, Ian L. 1969. Design with Nature. Garden City, N.Y: Natural 
History Press for the American Museum of Natural History. 
McIlwaine, Cathy. 2013. “Urbanisation and Gender-Based Violence: 
Exploring the Paradoxes in the Global South.” Environment and 
Urbanization 25(1): 65-79.
McKinsey Global Institute. 2015. The Power of Parity: How 
Advancing Women's Equality Can Add $12 Trillion to Global 
Growth. Consultant Report by Jonathan Woetzel, Anu Madgavkar, 
Kweilin Ellingrud, Eric Labaye, Sandrine Devillard, Eric Kutcher, 
James Manyika, Richard Dobbs, and Mekala Krishnan. New 
York: McKinsey and Company. https://www.mckinsey.com/~/
media/McKinsey/Featured Insights/Employment and Growth/How 
advancing womens equality can add 12 trillion to global growth/
MGI Power of parity_Executive summary_September 2015.ashx.
McMahon, Shannon A., Peter J. Winch, Bethany A. Caruso, 
Alfredo F. Obure, Emily A. Ogutu, Imelda A. Ochari, and Richard D. 
Rheingans. 2011. “‘The Girl with Her Period Is the One to Hang Her 
Head’ Reflections on Menstrual Management among Schoolgirls in 
Rural Kenya.” BMC International Health and Human Rights 11(1). 
doi:10.1186/1472-698x-11-7.
Mechakra-Tahiri, Samia, Ellen Freeman, Slim Haddad, Elodie 
Samson, and Maria Victoria Zunzunegui. 2012. “The Gender Gap 
in Mobility: A Global Cross-Sectional Study.” BMC Public Health 
12(598). 10.1186/1471-2458-12-598.  http://www.biomedcentral.
com/1471-2458/12/598
Meck, Stuart. 2005. " Zoning and Anti-Semitism in the 1920s: The 
Case of Cleveland Jewish Orphan Home v. Village of University 
Heights and Its Aftermath." Journal of Planning History 4(2): 91-
128. https://doi.org/10.1177/1538513205275236
Meschik, 
Michael. 
1995. 
Fußgänger- 
Und 
Radverkehr, 
Studienblätter. Vienna: Institute for Transport Studies, University of 
Natural Resources and Life Sciences. 
Miller, Carol, and Shahra Razavi. 1995. “From WID to GAD: 
Conceptual Shifts in the Women and Development Discourse.” 
UNRISD Occasional Paper, No. 1. Geneva: United Nations 
Research Institute for Social Development (UNRISD).
MLHUD (Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development of 
Uganda). 2019. The Gender Strategy for National Land Policy 
Implementation: Land and Property Ownership. Kampala, Uganda: 
MLHUD. 
https://gltn.net/download/uganda-gender-strategy-for-
national-land-policy-implementation/?wpdmdl=15397&refresh=5d
aa2e7a7b6871571434106
Moser, Caroline O. N. 1993. Gender Planning and Development: 
Theory, Practice and Training. London: Routledge.
Moser, Caroline. O. N., and Cathy McIlwaine. 2004. Encounters 
with Violence in Latin America. New York: Routledge.
6.3  Reference List

=== Página 103 ===
204
205
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
Moughtin, Cliff. 2003. Urban Design: Street and Square. Oxford: 
Architectural Press. 
Mulligan, Joe, Jamilla Harper, Pascal Kipmekboi, Bukonola 
Ngobi, Anna Collins. 2016. “Community-Responsive Adaptation to 
Flooding in Kibera, Kenya.” Engineering Sustainability 170(5):268-
280. doi:10.1680/jensu.15.00060.
Municipality of Barcelona. 2010. Municipal Plan for LGBT People in 
Barcelona. Plan by Municipality of Barecelona. https://www.dropbox.
com/s/8f2ck1zc7pf4pn3/Barcelona%20plamunicipallgtbeng.
pdf?dl=0 
Namaste, Ki. 1996. “Genderbashing: Sexuality, Gender, and the 
Regulation of Public Space.” Environment and Planning D: Society 
and Space 14(2): 221–40. https://doi.org/10.1068/d140221.
Nauges, Céline, and Jon Strand. 2013. Water Hauling and Girls’ 
School Attendance: Some New Evidence from Ghana. World Bank 
Policy Research Working Paper (No. 6443). Washington, DC: 
World Bank.
NC State (North Carolina State University, The Center for Universal 
Design). 1997. The Principles of Universal Design (database), 
edited by Bettye Rose Connell, Mike Jones, Ron Mace, Jim Mueller, 
Abir Mullick, Elaine Ostroff, Jon Sanford, Ed Steinfeld, Molly Story, 
and Gregg Vanderheiden. Accessed 9/1/19.  https://projects.ncsu.
edu/ncsu/design/cud/about_ud/udprinciplestext.htm
Nel-lo, Oriol, and Renata Mele. 2016. Cities in the 21st Century. 
New York: Routledge. 
Neumayer, Eric, and Eric Plümper. 2007. “The Gendered Nature of 
Natural Disasters: The Impact of Catastrophic Events on the Gender 
Gap in Life Expectancy, 1981–2002.” Annals of the Association of 
American Geographers 97(3):551-566.
Newman, Oscar. 1972. Defensible Space: Crime Prevention 
Through Urban Design. New York: Macmillan. 
Ng,  Wei-Shiuen and Ashley Acker. 2018. “Understanding Urban 
Travel Behaviour by Gender for Efficient and Equitable Transport 
Policies.” Discussion Paper 2018-01 for the International Transport 
Forum. Paris, February 2018. https://www.itf-oecd.org/sites/default/
files/docs/urban-travel-behaviour-gender.pdf
Nightingale, Carl Husemoller. 2016. Segregation: a Global History 
of Divided Cities. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.
Njoh, Ambe J. 2007. “Colonial Philosophies, Urban Space, 
and 
Racial 
Segregation 
in 
British 
and 
French 
Colonial 
Africa.” Journal of Black Studies 38(4): 579-599. https://doi.
org/10.1177/0021934706288447
Nurdden, Abdullah, Riza Atiq Rahmat, and Amiruddin Bin Ismail. 
2007. “Effect of Transportation Policies on Modal Shift from Private 
Car to Public Transport in Malaysia.” Journal of Applied Sciences 
7(7): 1014-1018. 
OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development). 
2018. Bridging the Digital Gender Divide: Include, Upskill, Innovate. 
Paris: OECD Publishing. http://www.oecd.org/internet/bridging-the-
digital-gender-divide.pdf
OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development). 
2019. “Gender Equality and Sustainable Infrastructure.” Issues 
Note for the Global OECD Council on SDGs: Side-Event. Paris, 
March 7. http://www.oecd.org/gov/gender-mainstreaming/gender-
equality-and-sustainable-infrastructure-7-march-2019.pdf
Okoro Catherine A., NaTasha D. Hollis, Alissa C. Cyrus, Shannon 
Griffin-Blake. 2016. “Prevalence of Disabilities and Health Care 
Access by Disability Status and Type among Adults—United 
States, 2016.” United States Center for Disease Control Morbidity 
and Mortality Weekly Report (MMWR), August 17 67(32):882–887. 
https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/67/wr/mm6732a3.htm
OSCE. 2019. Well-Being and Safety of Women. https://www.osce.
org/secretariat/413237?download=true
OWCH (Older Womens Co-housing). 2017. "Senior Cohousing- 
A Different Way of Living." Video from OWCH. https://vimeo.
com/246241053
OWCH (Older Womens Co-housing). 2019. (website). http://www.
owch.org.uk/
Oxfam. 2016. I Am Alone: Single Women and the Nepal Earthquake. 
An Oxfam Briefing Paper. Nairobi: Oxfam. https://oxf.am/2FSsXIv
Oxfam. 2019. Gender Inequalities and Food Insecurity: Ten Years 
after the Food Price Crisis, Why are Women Farmers Still Food-
Insecure? An Oxfam Briefing Paper by Hélène Botreau and Marc 
J. Cohen. Nairobi: Oxfam. https://oxfamilibrary.openrepository.
com/bitstream/handle/10546/620841/bp-gender-inequalities-food-
insecurity-150719-en.pdf
Perez, Caroline Criado. 2019. Invisible Women: Exposing Data 
Bias in a World Designed for Men. New York: Abrams Press. 
  
Perrons, Diane. 2004. Globalisation and Social Change: People 
and Places in a Divided World. London: Routledge.
Peters, 
Deike. 
2001. 
“Gender 
and 
Transport 
in 
Less 
Developed Countries: A Background Paper in Preparation 
for CSD-9.” Background Paper for the Expert Workshop 
"Gender 
Perspectives 
for 
Earth 
Summit 
2002: 
Energy, 
Transport, Information for Decision-Making" Berlin, Germany, 
January 
10 
- 
12. 
https://www.earthsummit2002.org/
workshop/Gender%20%26%20Transport%20S%20DP.pdf 
Phillips-Howard, Penelope A., Linda Mason, Jan Hopkins, Richard 
Rheingans, Kelly Alexander, Kayla Laserson, Frank Odhiambo, 
John Vulule, Aisha Mohamed, and Jackton Omoto. 2011. “Water 
and Sanitation Issues in Relation to Sexual and Reproductive 
Health Across the Female Lifespan (WSSRH).” Background paper 
prepared by the Liverpool John Moores University Centre for Public 
Health. Liverpool: Liverpool John Moores University
Pilo', Francesca. 2017. “Co-Producing Affordability to the Electricity 
Service: A Market-Oriented Response to Addressing Inequality of 
Access in Rio De Janeiro's Favelas.” Urban Research & Practice 
10(1): 86-101.
Pojani, Dorina, Dorothy Wardale, and Kerry Brown. 2018. “Sexism 
and the City: How Urban Planning Has Failed Women.” The 
Conversation (blog), April 17. https://theconversation.com/sexism-
and-the-city-how-urban-planning-has-failed-women-93854
Postma, Leonie, Renate Getkate, and Christine van Wijk. 2004. 
"Life Skills-Based Hygiene Education: A Guidance Document on 
Concepts, Development and Experiences with Life Skills-Based 
Hygiene Education in School Sanitation and Hygiene Education." 
in Technical Paper Series 42. Delft, The Netherlands: IRC 
International Water and Sanitation Centre.
Pournik, Milad, Jaeeun Chung, and Barbara Miller. 2012. "Gender 
Inclusion for Social Resilience: A Key Factor in Disaster Reduction, 
Relief, and Recovery.” Global Gender Program, Occasional Paper 
#2. 
https://cpb-us-e1.wpmucdn.com/blogs.gwu.edu/dist/1/1435/
files/2018/04/gender_inclusion_for_social_resilience-1wo9yyi.pdf
Quisumbing, Agnes R., and John A. Maluccio. 1999. Intrahousehold 
Allocation and Gender Relations: New Empirical Evidence. World 
Bank Development Research Group Policy Research Report 
on Gender and Development Working Paper Series, No. 2. 
Washington, D.C: World Bank. http://documents.worldbank.org/
curated/en/108631468770964199/pdf/multi-page.pdf
Ranade, Shilpa. 2007. "The Way She Moves: Mapping the 
Everyday Production of Gender-Space." Economic and Political 
Weekly 42(17): 1519-526. http://www.jstor.org/stable/4419518.
6.3  Reference List
Rathgeber, Eva M. 1990. “WID, WAD, GAD: Trends in Research 
and Practice.” The Journal of Developing Areas 24(4): 289-502.
Reale, Andreana and John Handmer. 2010. “Land Tenure, 
Disasters and Vulnerability.” Disasters 35(1):160-182. 
Reckien, Diana, Felix Creutzig, Blanca Fernandez, Shuaib Lwasa, 
Marcela Tovar-Restrepo, Darryn Mcevoy And David Satterthwaite. 
2007. " Climate Change, Equity and the Sustainable Development 
Goals: an Urban Perspective." Environment and Urbanization 
29(1): 159-182. https://doi.org/10.1177/0956247816677778
Roe, Jenny J., Catharine Ward Thompson, Peter A. Aspinall, Mark 
J. Brewer, Elizabeth I. Duff, David Miller, Richard Mitchell, and 
Angela Clow. 2013. “Green Space and Stress: Evidence from 
Cortisol Measures in Deprived Urban Communities.” International 
Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health 10(9): 
4086–4103. http://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph10094086 
Romero-Lankao, P. and J. L. Tribbia. 2009. “Assessing Patterns 
of Vulnerability, Adaptive Capacity and Resilience across Urban 
Centers.” Paper presented at the World Bank Fifth Urban Research 
Symposium on “Cities and Climate Change: Responding to an 
Urgent Agenda,” Marseille, June 28–30.
SAFP (Sathi All for Partnerships). 2013. The Next Steps Towards 
Rural Women Resource Zone in Shivpuri, Madhya Pradesh India. 
A Joint Rreport by Association Equal Saree, Towards Action And 
Learning (TAAL), Sathi All For Partnerships (SAFP). New Dehli: 
SAFP. https://safpsite.files.wordpress.com/2014/10/next-steps-for-
rural-wrz-september-14-2013.pdf
Samad, 
Hussain, 
and 
Fan 
Zhang. 
2019. 
Electrification 
and Women’s Empowerment: Evidence from Rural India. 
World Bank Policy Research Working Paper no. WPS 8796. 
Washington, DC: World Bank. http://documents.worldbank.org/
curated/en/112131553786901131/Electrification-and-Womens-
Empowerment-Evidence-from-Rural-India
Sánchez de Madariaga, Inés. 2013. “The Mobility of Care: A New 
Concept in Urban Transportation.” In Fair Shared Cities: The 
Impact of Gender Planning in Europe, edited by Inés Sánchez de 
Madariaga and Marion Roberts. London: Ashgate.
Sánchez-Páramo, Carolina, And Ana Maria Munoz-Boudet. 2018. 
“No, 70% of the World’s Poor Aren’t Women, But That Doesn’t 
Mean Poverty Isn’t Sexist.” Let’s Talk Development, World Bank 
Blog, March 8. https://blogs.worldbank.org/developmenttalk/no-70-
world-s-poor-aren-t-women-doesn-t-mean-poverty-isn-t-sexist
Sandberg, Linda, and Malin Rönnblom. 2016. “Imagining the 
Ideal City, Planning the Gender-Equal City in Umeå, Sweden.” 
Gender, Place & Culture 23(12): 1750-1762, doi:10.1080/096636
9X.2016.1249346 
Selase, Aphu Elvis, Li Feng Jiang and Stephanie Worlanyo. 2015. 
“Land Tenure System in the Pre-Colonial Era. Ghana as the Insight.” 
International Journal of African and Asian Studies 14: 89-95.
Semlyen, Joanna, Michael King, Justin Varney, and Gareth Hagger-
Johnson. 2016. “Sexual Orientation and Symptoms of Common 
Mental Disorder or Low Wellbeing: Combined Meta-Analysis of 12 
UK Population Health Surveys.” BMC Psychiatry 16(1). https://doi.
org/10.1186/s12888-016-0767-z.
Sibley, Susan S. 2016. “Why Do So Many Women Who Study 
Engineering Leave the Field?” Harvard Business Review, August 
23. 
https://hbr.org/2016/08/why-do-so-many-women-who-study-
engineering-leave-the-field
Silver, Christopher. 1997. “The Racial Origins of Zoning in American 
Cities.” In Urban Planning and the African American Community: 
In the Shadows, edited by June Manning Thomas and Marsha 
Ritzdorf. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publication.
Singh, Maanvi. 2018. “Apps Let Women Say #MeToo about Street 
Harassment.” NPR (National Public Radio), January 11. https://
www.npr.org/sections/goatsandsoda/2018/01/11/577154367/apps-
let-women-say-metoo-about-street-harassment.
Singh, 
Sejal 
and 
Laura 
E. 
Durso. 
2017. 
“Widespread 
Discrimination Continues to Shape LGBT People’s Lives in Both 
Subtle and Significant Ways.” Center for American Progress 
(blog), 
May 
2. 
https://www.americanprogress.org/issues/lgbt/
news/2017/05/02/429529/widespread-discrimination-continues-
shape-lgbt-peoples-lives-subtle-significant-ways/
Skinner, L., and K. Borlaug. 1980. “Shopping Trips: Who Makes 
Them and When.” In Women’s Travel Issues: Research Needs 
and Priorities. U.S. Department of Transportation, Research 
and Special Programs Administration. Washington, DC: U.S. 
Government Printing Office.
Solotaroff, Jennifer L. and Prabha, Rohini. 2014. Violence against 
women and girls: lessons from South Asia. Pande. 
Sommer, Marni. 2012. “Menstrual Hygiene Management in 
Humanitarian Emergencies: Gaps and Recommendations.” 
Waterlines 31 (1): 83–104. doi:10.3362/1756-3488.2012.008.
Songa, Jackson, Monica Machine, and Chris Rakoum. 2015. 
“Maternal Child Health through Water, Sanitation and Hygiene.” 
Sky Journal of Medicine and Medical Sciences 3(7): 94–104. 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/282854940_Maternal_
child_health_through_water_sanitation_and_hygiene.
Statistics and Informatics Division (SID), Ministry of Planning, 
Government of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh. 2015. 
Report on Violence Against Women (VAW) Survey 2015. Dhaka: 
Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics (BBS).
Steptoe, Andrew, Aparna Shankar, Panayotes Demakakos, and 
Jane Wardle. 2013. “Social Isolation, Loneliness, and All-Cause 
Mortality in Older Men and Women”. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences 110 (15): 5797–5801. https://doi.org/10.1073/
pnas.1219686110.
Sullivan, Susan. 2017. “Five Reasons Sexual Violence Increases 
in Disasters.” NSVRC (National Sexual Violence Resource Center) 
blog, September 19. https://www.nsvrc.org/blogs/five-reasons-
sexual-violence-increases-disasters
Sverdlik, Alice. 2011. “Ill-health and Poverty: A Literature Review 
on Health in Informal Settlements.” Environment and Urbanisation, 
23 (1): 123-55.
Sveriges Arkitekter (Sweden's Architects). 2014. “2014 års 
arkitekturpris har tilldelat Saras tankegång i Umeå.” Sveriges 
Arkitekter, 
December 
3. 
https://www.arkitekt.se/2014-ars-
arkitekturpris-ona/ 
Tacoli, Cecilia. 2012. “Urbanisation, Gender and Urban Poverty: 
Paid Work and Unpaid Care Work in the City.”  In Urbanization 
and Emerging Population Issues Working Paper 7. London: 
International Institute for Environment and Development. http://
pubs.iied.org/10614IIED.html.
Talen, Emily. 2012. City Rules: How Urban Regulations Affect 
Urban Form. Washington DC: Island Press. 
TFL (Transport for London). 2016. Action on Equality: TFL’s 
Commitments to 2020. A Transport for London Report. London: 
Transport for London. http://content.tfl.gov.uk/action-on-equality-
tfls-commitments-to-2020.pdf
Thompson, Catherine Ward, Jenny Roe, Peter Aspinall, Richard 
Mitchell, Angela Clow, and David Miller. 2012. “More Green Space 
is Linked to Less Stress in Deprived Communities: Evidence from 
Salivary Cortisol Patterns.” Landscape and Urban Planning 105(3): 
221–229. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.landurbplan.2011.12.015
Trohanis, Zoe Elena, Zuzana Svetlosakova, Helene Carlsson-Rex. 
2012. Making Women's Voices Count in Natural Disaster Programs 
in East Asia and the Pacific. World Bank East Asia and Pacific Region 
Social Development Notes. Washington, DC: World Bank. http://
6.3  Reference List

=== Página 104 ===
206
207
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/256721468247266798/
Making-womens-voices-count-in-natural-disaster-programs-in-
East-Asia-and-the-Pacific
Umeå, City of. 2019. Gendered Landscape (project website) at 
https://genderedlandscape.Umeå.se/in-english/ 
UN-HABITAT (United Nations Human Settlements Programme). 
2006. Navigating Gender in Development of Water and Sanitation 
in Urban Areas: A Rapid Gender Assessment of the Cities of 
Bhopal, Gwalior, Indore, and Jabalpur in Madya Pradesh, India. 
Nairobi: UN-HABITAT. https://www.ircwash.org/sites/default/files/
UNHabitat-2006-Navigating_0.pdf
UN-HABITAT (United Nations Human Settlements Progamme). 
2008a. Gendering Land Tools: Achieving Secure Tenure for Women 
and Men. Nairobi: UN-HABITAT. https://mirror.gltn.net/jdownloads/
GLTN%20Documents/gendering_land_toolseng2009.pdf
UN-HABITAT (United Nations Human Settlements Progamme). 
2008b. Gender Mainstreaming in Local Authorities - Best Practices. 
Nairobi: UN-HABITAT.
h t t p : / / m i r r o r. u n h a b i t a t . o r g / p m s s / l i s t I t e m D e t a i l s .
aspx?publicationID=2632
UN-HABITAT (United Nations Human Settlements Progamme). 
2011. Land, A Crucial Element in Housing the Urban Poor. Quick 
Guide 3 from the Housing the Poor in Africa Series. Nairobi: UN-
HABITAT.
UN-HABITAT (United Nations Human Settlements Progamme). 
2012. Concept note for the "Expert Group Meeting: Women‘s 
Economic Empowerment: Critical for Prosperous Cities." Nairobi: 
UN-HABITAT. As cited in UN-HABITAT, 2013. State of Women in 
Cities 2012-2013: Gender and the Prosperity of Cities. Nairobi: 
UN-HABITAT 
http://mirror.unhabitat.org/pmss/listItemDetails.
aspx?publicationID=3457" 
UN-HABITAT (United Nations Human Settlements Progamme). 
2013a. Adolescent Girls’ Views on Safety in Cities. New York: UN-
HABITAT. https://femmesetvilles.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/
Adolescent-Girls-Views-Safety-in-Cities-full-report-English.pdf
UN-HABITAT (United Nations Human Settlements Progamme). 
2013b. Gender Issue Guide: Gender Responsive Urban Basic 
Services. Nairobi: UN-HABITAT
UN-HABITAT (United Nations Human Settlements Progamme). 
2015. Global Public Space Toolkit: From Global Principles to Local 
Policies and Practice. Nairobi: UN-HABITAT. https://unhabitat.org/
wp-content/uploads/2015/10/Global%20Public%20Space%20
Toolkit.pdf
UN-OHCHR (UN Office of the High Commissioner for Human 
Rights). 2007. From Exclusion to Equality: Realizing the Rights of 
Persons with Disabilities 14. Geneva: United Nations. doi: https://
doi.org/10.18356/46bfff7d-en
UN-Women. 2016. “The Economic Costs of Violence against 
Women”. Remarks by UN Assistant SecretaryGeneral and Deputy 
Executive Director of UN Women, Lakshmi Puri at the high-level 
discussion on the “Economic Cost of Violence against Women”, 
21 September. https://www.unwomen.org/en/news/stories/2016/9/
speech-by-lakshmi-puri-on-economic-costs-of-violence-against-
women
UNDP 
(United 
Nations 
Development 
Programme). 
2003. 
Transforming the Mainstream: Gender in UNDP. New York: 
United 
Nations. 
https://www.iknowpolitics.org/sites/default/files/
transforming20the20mainstream20-20part201.pdf
UNICEF (United Nations Children's Fund). 2016. “Collecting Water 
Is Often A Colossal Waste Of Time For Women And Girls.” UNICEF 
Press Release, August 29. https://www.unicef.org/press-releases/
unicef-collecting-water-often-colossal-waste-time-women-and-girls
United Nations. 2002. Gender Mainstreaming: An Overview. New 
York: United Nations. https://www.un.org/womenwatch/osagi/pdf/
e65237.pdf
United Nations. 2019. “Impact of Natural Disasters Increasingly 
Affecting Those Most Vulnerable, Speakers Say as Commission 
for Social Development Continues Session.” Proceedings from the 
Economic and Social Council Commission For Social Development 
Fifty-Seventh Session, 6th & 7th Meetings, New York, February 13. 
https://www.un.org/press/en/2019/soc4876.doc.htm
UNFPA. 2017. Sexual Harassment on Public Buses and Trains 
in Sri Lanka. https://srilanka.unfpa.org/sites/default/files/pub-pdf/
FINAL%20POLICY%20BRIEF%20-%20ENGLISH_0.pdf
URBACT. 2018. Gender Equality at the Heart of the City: A Tour to 
an Urban "Gendered" Landscape to Raise Awareness and Promote 
Gender Equality. Project report provided by URBACT. https://
urbact.eu/sites/default/files/379_Umea_GPsummary.pdf. 
See 
also Good Practice Summary - The Gendered City Tour (Umeå) 
at https://urbact.eu/sites/default/files/379_Umea_GPsummary.pdf
Valentine, Gill. 1990. “Women’s Fear and the Design of Public 
Space”. Built Environment 16(4): 288-303. 
Victory Institute. 2018. Out for America 2018: A Census of Out 
LGBTQ Elected Officials Nationwide.  Washington, DC: Victory 
Institute. 
https://victoryinstitute.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/08/
Victory_Out-For-America-2018.pdf
Wall, Ed and Tim Waterman. 2010. Basics Landscape Architecture 
01: Urban Design. Lausanne, Switzerland: AVA Publishing. 
Walter, Jonathan, ed. 2006.World Disasters Report 2006 – Focus 
on Neglected Crises. Geneva: International Federation of Red 
Cross and Red Crescent Societies. https://www.ifrc.org/Global/
Publications/disasters/WDR/WDR2006-English-LR.pdf
Watson, Vanessa. 2009. “'The Planned City Sweeps the Poor 
Away…’: Urban Planning and 21st Century Urbanisation.” 
Progress in Planning 72(3):151–193. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
progress.2009.06.002
Watts, Susan. 2004. “Women, Water Management and Health.” 
Emerging Infectious Diseases 10(11): 2025–2026. doi:10.3201/
eid1011.040237
Wekerle, Gerda R. 1980. “Women in the Urban Environment.” 
Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and Society 5(S3). 
doi:10.1086/495719.
Welle, Ben, Wei Li, Claudia Adriazola-Steil, Robin King, Marta 
Obelheiro, Claudio Sarmiento and Qingnan Liu. 2015. Cities 
Safer by Design: Urban Design Recommendations for Healthier 
Cities, Fewer Traffic Fatalities. Washington DC: World Resources 
Institute. https://www.wri.org/publication/cities-safer-design
Wendel, John August. 2017. “Just Be(ing)Yourself:Transgender 
Women of Color in LosAngeles’ Everyday Public Spaces” Master 
of Science in Urban and Regional Planning Thesis, UCLA, 2017. 
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2n2395rb
Wendland, Claudia, Maya Yadav, Anke Stock, and Joni Seager. 
2017. Gender and Sanitation Issues. In J.B. Rose and B. 
Jiménez-Cisneros, (eds) Global Water Pathogens Project, Part 
1 The Health Hazards of Excreta: Theory and Control. http://
www.waterpathogens.org/sites/default/files/Gender%2C%20
Women%20and%20Sanitation_2_0.pdf
WHO (World Health Organization). 2007. Engaging men and 
boys in changing gender-based inequity in health: Evidence from 
programme interventions. Geneva: World Health Organization.
WHO (World Health Organization). 2011. World Report on 
Disability: 2011. Geneva: WHO. https://www.who.int/disabilities/
world_report/2011/report.pdf.
6.3  Reference List
WHO (World Health Organization). ‎2013‎. Global and Regional 
Estimates of Violence Against Women: Prevalence and Health 
Effects of Intimate Partner Violence and Non-Partner Sexual 
Violence. Geneva: World Health Organization. https://apps.who.int/
iris/handle/10665/85239
WHO (World Health Organization). 2016a. Global Health 
Observatory (GHO) database. Accessed 9/1/19. https://www.who.
int/gho/ncd/risk_factors/physical_activity_text/en/
WHO (World Health Organization). 2016b. Global Health Estimates 
2015: Deaths by Cause, Age, Sex, by Country and by Region, 
2000-2015. Geneva: World Health Organization. https://www.who.
int/healthinfo/global_burden_disease/estimates/en/index1.html
WHO (World Health Organization). 2017. Factsheet: Violence 
against Women. Accessed 9/1/19.https://www.who.int/news-room/
fact-sheets/detail/violence-against-women
WHO & UNICEF (World Health Organization and United Nations 
Children’s Fund). 2015. Progress on Sanitation and Drinking 
Water: 2015 Update and MDG Assessment. Geneva: World 
Health Organization (WHO). https://www.unicef.org/publications/
index_82419.html
WHO & UNICEF (World Health Organization and United Nations 
Children’s Fund). 2017. Progress on Drinking Water, Sanitation 
and Hygiene: 2017 Update and SDG Baselines. Geneva: World 
Health Organization (WHO). https://www.unicef.org/publications/
index_96611.html
WHO & UNICEF (World Health Organization and United Nations 
Children’s Fund). 2019. Progress on Household Drinking Water, 
Sanitation and Hygiene 2000-2017. Special Focus on Inequalities. 
Geneva: World Health Organization (WHO). https://data.worldbank.
org/indicator/SH.STA.BASS.UR.ZS?locations=ZG&view=map
Wildeman, Robert. 1995. Social Assessment and the Baku Water 
Supply Project. Washington, DC: World Bank. http://documents.
worldbank.org/curated/en/981781468768674229/Social-
assessment-and-the-Baku-water-supply-project
Winter, Samantha, Francis Barchi, and Millicent Ningoma Dzombo.  
2019. “Exploring the Complex Relationship between Women’s 
Sanitation Practices and Household Diarrhea in the Slums of 
Nairobi: A Cross-Sectional Study.” BMC Infectious Diseases 19:242 
https://doi.org/10.1186/s12879-019-3875-9. 
See 
also 
Winter, 
Samantha, Francis Barchi, and Millicent Ningoma Dzombo. 2019. 
“Not Just Any Toilet – Women’s Solutions to Sanitation in Informal 
Settlements in Nairobi.” Development in Practice 29(1): 15-25, doi: 
10.1080/09614524.2018.1519013
Women4Climate. 2019. "A Better City for Everyone: A Case Study 
on Barcelona's Gender Justice Plan." A Women4Climate Case 
study. New York: C40. https://w4c.org/case-study/better-city-
everyone-case-study-barcelonas-gender-justice-plan. See also 
" Women's Leadership in Cleantech: A Case Study on London's 
Action Plan." 2018. A Women4Climate Case study. New York: C40. 
https://w4c.org/case-study/womens-leadership-cleantech-case-
study-londons-action-plan
World Bank. 2012. World Development Report 2012: Gender 
Equality and Development. Washington, DC: World Bank. https://
siteresources.worldbank.org/INTWDR2012/
6.3  Reference List
Resources/7778105-1299699968583/7786210-1315936222006/
Complete-Report.pdf
World Bank. 2013. Engaging men and boys in advancing women’s 
agency: Where we stand and new directions. Washington, DC: 
World Bank.
World Bank. 2015. World Bank Group Gender Strategy (FY16-
23): Gender Equality, Poverty Reduction, and Inclusive Growth. 
Washington, DC: World Bank. http://documents.worldbank.
org/curated/en/820851467992505410/pdf/102114-REVISED-
PUBLIC-WBG-Gender-Strategy.pdf
World Bank. 2016. Women, Business and the Law 2016: Getting 
to Equal. Washington, DC: World Bank. doi: 10.1596/978-1-4648-
0677-3
World Bank. 2018. Life on the Margins: Survey Results 
of the Experiences of LGBTI People in Southeastern 
Europe. 
https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/bitstream/
handle/10986/30607/130420-REPLACEMENT-PUBLIC-
FINAL-WEB-Life-on-the-Margins-Survey-Results-of-the-
Experiences-of-LGBTI-People-in-Southeastern-Euro-
pe.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y
World Bank. 2019. Women, Business and the Law 2019: A 
Decade of Reform (English).Washington, DC: World Bank. http://
documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/101301551208346052/
Women-Business-and-the-Law-2019-A-Decade-of-Reform
Zohir, Salma Chaudhuri. 2003. Integrating Gender into World Bank 
Financed Transport Programs: Case Study - Bangladesh Dhaka 
Urban Transport Project. Washington, DC: World Bank. http://
documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/451771468206959040/
Integrating-gender-into-World-Bank-financed-transport-
programs-case-study-Bangladesh-Dhaka-Urban-Transport-
Project
Zweynert, Astrid (ed.). 2015. “Why is LGBT Poverty Ignored?” 
World Economic Forum (blog). October 26. https://www.weforum.
org/agenda/2015/10/why-is-lgbt-poverty-ignored/

=== Página 105 ===
208
209
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
World Bank Handbook for Gender-Inclusive Urban Planning and Design
6.4  Image Credits
IMAGE CREDITS
P12 "Women participate in a community meeting" by Roots, 
Tubers and Bananas (CC BY 2.0)
P16 © World Bank
 
P52 Unknown (CC0 1.0)
P55 "Bus window" by Luisen Rodrigo (CC BY 2.0)
P65 © KDI
P66 © World Bank
P68 © KDI
P70 © World Bank
P94 © KDI
P100 - P119 © KDI
P122 © World Bank
P125 "Women digging a contour in an uphill Kagadi, Hoima" by 
Nancy Okwong (CC BY 4.0)
P128 Unknown (CC0 1.0)
P131 "Indian women" by Christian Haugen (CC BY 2.0)
P134 "Woman on Rock Platform Viewing City" by Picjumbo (CC0 
1.0)
P137 "Avenida Sarmiento" by Dan DeLuca (CC BY 2.0)
P140 © KDI
P143 "Woman sitting inside bus" by Vladi Surguci (CC0 BY 1.0)
P146 "A woman is pushing a bike with two kids on it" by Stougard 
(CC BY-SA 3.0)
P149 "Women in tribal village, Umaria district" by Yann Forget 
(CC BY-SA 3.0)
P152 © KDI
P155 "Barrio Caracas"by Jaume Escofet (CC BY 2.0)
P158 "Caracas, Venezuela" by Esteban Pulido (CC BY 2.0)
P161 "Célestine Ketcha Courtès during "Women4Climate" with 
leading women in climate at the Marrakech Climate Change 
Conference" by UNClimateChange (CC BY 2.0)
P164 "Women working in fields, Kashmir" by Flowcomm (CC BY 
2.0)
P167 "Activities at #SADA Centre" by UN Women Europe and 
Central Asia (CC BY 2.0)
P170 "Young woman carrying a water bucket on her head" by 
Gary Masters (CC BY-SA 3.0 IGO)
P172 © KDI
P175 Unknown (CC0 BY 1.0)
P178 "Greening & defensible space - Ladybur Housing Co-op #1" 
by Alan Stanton (CC0 BY 1.0)
P181 "Portal del Norte station, in the TransMilenio rapid bus 
system, in Bogotá, Colombia" by Sebastian Reategui (CC0 BY 
1.0)
P184 "Woman Wearing Yellow Hooded Coat Riding Bicycle" by 
Tembela Bohle (Pexels)
P187 "Khayelitsha" by Elyob (CC BY 2.0)
P190 Untitled by Stanisław Krawczyk (CC BY 2.0)
P193 "Photographing market life at Gerehu" by Ness Kerson 
(CC0 BY 1.0)
P196 "Chicago, IL"  by Alan Light (CC BY 2.0)
P199 "Snow plow truck salting roads before a snow storm" by 
Unknown (CC0 BY 1.0)
P201 "Lighting up remote villages" by DFID (CC BY 2.0)
P204 "Studying" by Han Lee (CC BY 2.0)
P207 "Women washing wool" by Adam Jones (CC BY 2.0)
P210 "The special need of girls and women during the time of 
menstruation must be taken into account" by Marni Sommer (CC 
BY 2.0)
P213 "Cartonero-family" by Dan DeLuca (CC BY 2.0)
P216 "Suzhou woman burning waste" by Jakub Halun (CC BY-SA 
4.0)
P219 "Sidewalk scenes on the streets of Bogota" by "Nino" 
Eugene La Pia (CC BY 2.0)
P222 Unknown (CC0 1.0)
P225 - P229 © KDI
P230 "The Solitary Reaper" by Navaneeth Kishor (CC BY 2.0)
P230 Unknown (CC BY 1.0)
P232 "Sangam Meeting in Progress" by Jaimoen87 (CC BY 1.0)
P234 "2019 Pride: Sitges, Spain" by Mike McBey (CC BY 2.0)
P234 "Tribute to the LGBT community, Citadel Park" by Pete 
Johns (CC BY 2.0)
P236 "Ajuntament de Barcelona" by Serge Melki (CC BY 2.0)
P238 Unknown (CC BY 1.0)
P238 "India on the road, women at construction site, New Delhi, 
2001" by R Barraez D´Lucca (CC BY 2.0)
P240 "In India, UN Women Executive Director hears from rural 
tech gurus" by Gaganjit Singh (CC BY 2.0)
P240 Unknown (CC BY 1.0)
P242 "Muzaffarabad - 2005 Kashmir earthquake" by Timothy 
Smith (CC BY 2.0)
P242 "Following the 2005 earthquake in Kashmir, affected 
communities developed gender action plans" by Gretchen Alther 
(CC BY 2.0)
P242 "After the 2005 Pakistan earthquake, Kashmiri women 
participated in a gender workshop with a focus on women's land 
inheritance rights" by Gretchen Alther (CC BY 2.0)
P244 "Following the 2005 earthquake in Pakistan, UUSC 
worked to ensure that women and girls had access to their land-
inheritance rights" by Gretchen Alther (CC BY 2.0)
P246 Unknown (CC BY 1.0)
P248 Unknown (CC BY 1.0)
6.4  Image Credits
P248 "Sitting" by Andrey (CC BY 2.0)
P250 "Mexico City Trolley bus" by Jeffrey Beall (CC BY 2.0)
P250 "Mexico City Urban Bus" by Rafael.lcw0120 (CC BY 4.0)
P252 "Femicide Protest Zocalo- protester with sign" by Thayne 
Tuason (CC BY 4.0)
P254 "The glass artwork Lev! covers the walls inside the tunnel at 
Umeå Central Station" by Frederik Larsson (CC BY-SA 4.0)
P256 "Art work "Lev!" ("Live!")" by Mickeno (CC BY-SA 3.0)
P256 "Outdoor Art work "Lev!" ("Live!")" by Mickeno (CC BY-SA 
3.0)
P257 "Stairs to the tunnel under the rails at Umeå Central Station" 
by Frederik Larsson (CC BY-SA 4.0)
P258 - P260 © KDI
P262 "Water girls" by Ravi Khemka (CC BY 2.0)
P264 "Water collection" by Department of Foreign Affairs and 
Trade (CC BY 2.0)
P264 "Tattooed, Maheshwar" by Nevil Zaveri (CC BY 2.0)
P266 "Predio Sede da Coelce" by Conti Felipe (CC BY-SA 3.0)
P268 "Lixão da Estrutural" by Senado Federal (CC BY 2.0)
P270 © World Bank
All graphics © KDI

=== Página 106 ===
Kounkuey Design Initiative
World Bank 2020

